================================================================================
PLAYBOOK PDF
================================================================================
Pages: 28

--- PLAYBOOK PAGE 1 ---
PLAYBOOK
GMT Games, LLC • P.O. Box 1308, Hanford, CA 93232-1308 • www.GMTGames.com
Setup............................................................................... 2
Extended Example of Play............................................. 3
Further Examples.......................................................... 12
Guide for CDG Players................................................ 13
Historical Background.................................................. 14
Designer’s Notes........................................................... 27
Selected Bibliography & Ludography.......................... 28
Credits........................................................................... 28
TA B L E  O F  C O N T E N T S
July 2020
Living Playbook
This is the “Living Playbook” document for the game. It includes updates and clarifications to the original rules. 
 To aid readability, updates and clarifications are indicated in blue text.


--- PLAYBOOK PAGE 2 ---
Imperial Struggle ~ Playbook
2
© 2020 GMT Games, LLC
1.	 Lay out the board.
2.	 Prepare the Event Deck by separating out the Succession 
Era Event cards. Shuffle them, and place them on the Draw 
Pile area of the Event Deck display (A). Put the Empire and 
Revolution Era Event cards aside; they will be used later.
3.	 Mix up the Investment Tiles and stack them face down in 
the Investment Tile Stack section of the Investment Tile 
Display (B). 
4.	 Each player takes their Basic War Tiles and mixes them up 
in a face down pile, placing them in the appropriate box on 
their Player Mat (C1, C2). Then, each player takes the Bonus 
War Tiles for the War of the Spanish Succession, mixes them 
up, then puts them in a face down pile in the Bonus War Tiles 
box of their Player Mat.
5.	 Place flags and Squadrons on the map as directed below. 
(The map itself also indicates where the starting flags should 
go.) Place the remaining Squadrons for each player in the 
Unbuilt Squadrons box of their respective Player Mats.
6.	 Place the War of the Spanish Succession War Display next 
to the main board (D). Each player then draws four Basic 
War Tiles and randomly places one in each theater, in order, 
face down. The players may inspect their own War Tiles after 
placement.
7.	 Place the Game Turn marker on turn 1 and the VP marker 
on the 15 space on the General Records Track (E).
8.	 Mix up the six Global Demand tiles and place them face 
down near the Global Demand table (F).
9.	 Mix up the eight Award tiles and place two in each Region’s 
Award box, face down.
10.	Put the Conflict markers and Exhausted markers near the 
board, ready for use.
11.	Put the Advantage tiles face up in their spaces on the map 
(except Wheat and Algonquin Raids).
12.	Place the Initiative marker in the Initiative space (G), French 
side up.
Initial Flag & Player Marker Placement
 Britain:
•	 Europe
o	 Flags in Austria (Alliance 2), Dutch Republic (3-cost 
Prestige space), German States (Alliance 3)
•	 North America
o	 Flags in Massachusetts Bay, Northern Colonies, Hudson 
Valley, Chesapeake
•	 Caribbean
o	 Flags in Carolinas, Georgia, Jamaica, Barbados, St. Lucia
•	 India
o	 Flags in Madras, Kanchipuram, Calcutta, Midnapore
•	 Navy Box: 2 Squadrons
•	 General Records Track
o	 Debt Limit: 6; Debt: 0; Treaty Points: 0
•	 Advantage Box (Playmat)
o	 Wheat
  France:
•	 Europe
o	 Flags in Spain (Alliance 3), Austria (3-cost Prestige space, 
lower right), Bavaria, Ireland (Alliance 2)
•	 North America
o	 Flags in Quebec & Montreal, Acadia, Cataraqui, Algonquin
•	 Caribbean
o	 Flags in Louisiana, St. Domingue, Guadeloupe, Port de 
Paix, Martinique
•	 India
o	 Flags in Chandernagore, Pondicherry, Karaikal, Plassey
•	 War of the Spanish Succession (Central Europe theater): 
1 Bonus War Tile
•	 Navy Box: 1 Squadron
•	 General Records Track
o	 Debt Limit: 6; Debt: 0; Treaty Points: 0
•	 Advantage Box (Playmat)
o	 Algonquin Raids
Setup


--- PLAYBOOK PAGE 3 ---
© 2020 GMT Games, LLC
Imperial Struggle ~ Playbook
3
Extended Example of Play
Raj and Eliza are playing Imperial Struggle, with Raj as the 
French player (blue) and Eliza as the British player (red). Dur-
ing step 6 of setup, Raj and Eliza draw War Tiles for the War of 
the Spanish Succession as shown on the War Display below. (In 
this example, all of these tiles are revealed for clarity, but in the 
actual game each side can only see their own tiles.) Note that 
the French start with one Bonus War Tile in Europe as well, in 
this case Maison du Roi:
Raj is fairly happy with these tiles, although the Jacobites may 
need some help. Eliza is a little less satisfied, particularly with 
the prospect of losing ground in North America so early in the 
game.
Eliza and Raj are now ready to begin the first turn. They skip 
the Deck and Debt Limit phases, since these do not occur on 
turn 1. For the Award phase, they flip the top Award tile in each 
Award box face up. (The bottom one will be flipped face up in the 
Award phase of turn 2.) The Regional awards for the turn will be:
•	 Europe: 1 VP (+1 Treaty Point)
•	 North America: 2 VP
•	 India: 1 VP (+1 Treaty Point)
•	 Caribbean: 0 VP (+1 Treaty Point)
Eliza grinds her teeth a bit as she sees that North America 
carries the highest VP award this turn, where she is already 
nervous about her military preparedness. (She does not know 
that Raj’s best Basic War tile is also there!) Still, the 2 VP tile 
requires a margin of 2 flags 
and/or Squadrons to secure, so 
it’s a little harder to grab. The 
players now turn to Global 
Demand, drawing three tiles: 
Fish, Tobacco, and Sugar. 
Just like that, the situation has 
changed: the Caribbean, with 
its 0 VP award, seemed likely to 
be quiet this turn. But with both 
of its commodities in Global 
Demand—putting an additional 
5 VP on the table—the Carib-
bean is now primed to attract 
quite a lot of attention. Eliza 
is also unhappy with the Fish 
draw, since it adds further value 
to North American investment. 
She resolves to address the 
military situation there with 
even greater urgency before the 
outbreak of Queen Anne’s War.
The players skip the Reset 
Phase since there are not as yet 
any Exhausted markers in play, 
and reveal the turn’s Investment Tiles, taking 9 total tiles and 
placing them face up in the Available Investment Tiles area. 
They end up with:
	
	
	
This Global Demand draw dramatically increases the 
Caribbean’s economic value for the turn.


--- PLAYBOOK PAGE 4 ---
Imperial Struggle ~ Playbook
4
© 2020 GMT Games, LLC
Both players immediately take note of several considerations 
in this Investment Tile draw. Only three tiles have the Event 
symbol, so only three Events will be playable this turn—and 
being the player who gets to play two may make a big difference. 
Second, there is only one tile with a Major Military action on 
it, so most military actions will require Debt (Minor Military 
Actions, of which there are several, grant only 2 Military Action 
Points [
]). Also, only one player will be able to carry out any 
aggressive naval action, since displacing an enemy squadron 
requires a Major action or an Event. (Remember that, barring 
the presence of a Conflict marker, opposing flags and Squadrons 
can’t be removed with Minor actions, and Conflict markers can’t 
occupy Naval spaces.) There may be high returns to being first 
to deploy Squadrons. The flip side of the scarcity of 
 is the 
wealth of Diplomatic Action Points (
). Opportunities to make 
alliances around the world will be plentiful.
The players now draw their Event hands. Raj draws #3 Tropi-
cal Diseases, #12 Military Spending Overruns, and #8 Tax 
Reform. Eliza draws #6 Native American Alliances, #1 
Carnatic War, and #15 Interest Payments. Both players know 
there’s no way they’ll be able to play all of their Events, given 
the paucity of Event opportunities on the Investment Track, so 
they turn to their Ministry card choices focused primarily on 
board position. 
Raj looks at his cards and the Investment Tiles, and decides that 
he will focus on Europe this turn. The wealth of Diplomatic ac-
tions combines well with his Ministry card #M-1 The Cardinal 
Ministers:
The Governance keyword is useless to him this turn, since he 
has no Events whose bonus effects trigger from Governance, but 
perhaps he’ll draw one next turn, and the extra Diplomatic power 
this card offers seems worth it. And since he plans to make strong 
diplomatic moves in Europe, he chooses #M-3 Court Of The 
Sun King as his second Ministry Card. In addition to offering 
bonus VP for winning the Europe award, it has the Scholarship 
keyword, which will enhance the effect of his Tropical Diseases 
Event—an unpleasant surprise for Eliza should she choose to 
move aggressively in the Caribbean (which, given the Global 
Demand situation, seems likely). He places his Ministry cards 
face down on his player mat, since a Ministry card is not revealed 
until any of its capabilities are used.
   
Eliza is very happy to see Native American Alliances, whose 
effect is quite powerful—especially if the bonus effect can be 
triggered. However, to play this Event card, she must select 
an Investment Tile with not only an Event symbol, but also a 
Diplomatic Major Action (as indicated by the Diplomatic ac-
tion icon in the card’s upper left corner). Thankfully, two of the 
Investment Tiles with Event symbols carry Diplomatic Major 
Actions, so as long as she gets one of them she’ll be able to play 
Native American Alliances.
She wants the bonus effect, so she decides to take #M-7 East 
India Company as her first Ministry card, since it has the Mer-
cantilism keyword. It also rewards her for controlling economic 
Advantages, which may pay in the long term. So, for her second 
Ministry card, she selects #M-10 Edmond Halley. The plethora 
of Minor Military actions will ensure she gets to build a cheap 
Squadron, and establishing the Royal Navy’s presence in North 
America and the Caribbean will help her protect the Markets 
she’ll need to capture those regional and commodity awards. 
Also, since she won’t get to play all of her Event cards, Halley’s 
ability to trade one Event card for a Treaty Point seems useful.
   
With Ministry cards selected, Raj (as the Initiative player) must 
now decide who will go first. Going first will allow him to select 
the sole Major Military Action on the Investment Track; or he 


--- PLAYBOOK PAGE 5 ---
© 2020 GMT Games, LLC
Imperial Struggle ~ Playbook
5
could ensure that he’ll get to play two Events. Ideally he’d like 
to spring Tropical Diseases on Eliza late in the turn, but with so 
few Event symbols available, they’re unlikely to last that long. 
Of course, going second will give him the final word on the 
board before the Scoring Phase. Raj nonetheless decides to go 
first, and selects this Investment Tile for his first Action Round:
First, Raj must decide whether to play an Event, as permitted by 
the Event symbol on the tile. He chooses Tropical Diseases, 
and removes a British flag from St. Lucia and one of his own 
French flags from Martinique. The bonus effect then permits him 
to remove an additional British flag, so he also removes the flag 
in Georgia. He flips his Court Of The Sun King Ministry card 
face up, since he is using its Scholarship keyword.
Now Raj can take the Actions listed on the Investment Tile—a 
Major Diplomatic Action worth 3 
, and a Minor Military 
Action worth 2 
. With an eye to improving the effect of The 
Cardinal Ministers, he spends 3 
 to place a French flag 
in the 3-cost Prestige space in Spain. He also decides to take 2 


--- PLAYBOOK PAGE 6 ---
Imperial Struggle ~ Playbook
6
© 2020 GMT Games, LLC
Debt for 2 additional 
, placing another French flag in Savoy. 
Since he now controls both spaces connected to the Mediter-
ranean Intrigue Advantage, he takes that tile, and places it in 
the Advantages section of his player mat. He can use it on the 
next Action Round to place a Conflict Marker in Spain, Austria, 
or Sardinia, provided Eliza does not take away his control of 
either space connected to Mediterranean Intrigue.
Now Raj takes his Minor Military Action and spends its 2 
 
along with 1 additional Debt to fund the fort at Louisbourg. This 
is expensive, and places him at risk of dangerous Events that 
punish the player with less Available Debt, but Raj feels that 
Louisbourg will be especially valuable this turn since it provides 
access to all three Fish markets (and Fish is in Global Demand). 
That concludes the first French Action Round.
Eliza decides to take this Investment Tile:
It has a Military Upgrade symbol—and it is the only one this 
turn that does! But, first things first: she plays Native American 
Alliances from her hand. 
She flips her East India Company Ministry card face up, to take 
advantage of the Mercantilism keyword. The base effect, Four 
Mohawk Kings, lets her shift a Local Alliance in North America. 
She could thereby unflag the Algonquin alliance with the French, 
but that would leave her without any way of using the bonus 
effect (since she needs 
, which she has none of this round, to 
use Wheat). So she instead shifts the Iroquois alliance, placing 
a British flag there and taking the Iroquois Raids Advantage 
tile. Now that she controls an Advantage in North America, she 
immediately activates it as the Event’s bonus effect (note that it 
does not matter that she acquired this Advantage just now; the 
word “immediately” on the Event card supersedes the rule that 
Advantages cannot be activated on the same Action Round they 
are acquired) and places a Conflict Marker in Albany (to reduce 
its cost for future acquisition). Since the Event directs her to 
ignore Exhaustion, she does not place an Exhausted marker on 
Iroquois Raids.
Now, Eliza uses the Military Upgrade on the Investment Tile. 
She chooses to replace the tile in the “Queen Anne’s War” the-
ater, and conceals a grin as she draws one of her “+2” Basic War 
Tiles, placing it in the Queen Anne’s War theater. She removes 
the incumbent “0” strength tile from the game.
The tradeoff Eliza incurs for access to these extra capabilities is 
the relatively low Action Points—only 2—for her Diplomatic 
Major Action. She decides to make a diplomatic overture in 
Sardinia and places a British flag there. For her Minor Military 
Action, she spends 1 
 to Deploy one of her Squadrons from 
the Navy Box to the Balearic Naval Space. Unfortunately, the 
other 
 is wasted, since only one purchase may be made with 
a Minor Action. She then decides to use Halley’s second abil-
ity to discard Carnatic War, moving her Treaty Points marker 
up to the ‘1’ space on the General Records Track, and placing 
an Exhausted marker on the bottom half of Halley’s card. That 
concludes the first British Action Round.


--- PLAYBOOK PAGE 7 ---
© 2020 GMT Games, LLC
Imperial Struggle ~ Playbook
7
Raj now faces a dilemma. His remaining Events are not strong in 
the current situation (Military Spending Overruns would be 
a great play if Eliza had several military assets already in play, 
like deployed Squadrons or Bonus War Tiles, but she doesn’t 
yet; Tax Reform will let him recover the Debt he took on his 
first Action Round, but he won’t get the bonus effect, as neither 
of his Ministry cards shows the Finance keyword). Nonethe-
less, by taking the only remaining tile with an Event symbol, he 
could deny Eliza the opportunity to play an Event—especially 
one that would punish him for having less Available Debt than 
she does. Alternately, he could take the single tile with a Major 
Military Action, to strengthen his position in the upcoming War 
and deny Eliza the chance to deploy all of her Squadrons in a 
single Action Round.
He decides to take the chance that Eliza doesn’t hold any Events 
that will let her punish him for having less Available Debt than 
she does, and selects this Investment Tile:
Raj spends 1 
 to deploy his only Squadron from the Navy Box 
to Biscay, a Naval Space in Europe; this will help him in the 
Spain theater of the upcoming War of the Spanish Succession. It 
is also a Prestige space, so it will help him win both the Europe 
award and the Prestige bonus this turn. With his remaining 3 
, 
and 1 Debt for a fourth, he decides to build a second Squadron 
which he places in the Navy Box. French Debt now stands at 4.
With the 2 Economic Action Points (
) from the Economic 
Minor Action, Raj decides to complete the second French Ac-
tion Round by flagging Georges Bank, a Fish Market that also 
gives him access to Halifax. If Eliza lets this go unanswered, 
that could allow a second French fort to be built in this area. The 
Fish race is now tied at 1 (with Eliza controlling Massachusetts 
Bay, and Raj controlling Georges Bank).
Eliza frowns. She could take the last remaining tile with an 
Event symbol and use it to play Interest Payments, but the 
bonus effect won’t do anything for her since she has no Debt! 
Instead, she decides to take this Investment Tile, and begin her 
economic power play in the Caribbean:
She spends 4  replacing the flags in Georgia and St. Lucia that 
she lost to Tropical Diseases. Next, she takes on 1 Debt and 
spends 1 Treaty Point to flag Santiago, to increase her relative 
advantage in Sugar markets. Finally, she decides to take 2 ad-
ditional Debt to flag Albany, in North America. The base cost 
to take Albany is 1, since it contains a Conflict marker, but she 
must pay 1 additional  to flag it since she is switching Regions 
(Diplomatic and Economic purchases in a second Region cost 1 
extra action point). The Conflict marker in Albany is removed 
(as always, when a space changes control) and Eliza places a 
British flag there.
With the Minor Military Action, she deploys a Squadron to the 
Antilles Channel. This will increase the cost for Raj to unflag St. 
Lucia, which will help her avoid getting bottled up in Barbados. 
This costs 1 
; the second 
 is wasted, since Minor actions can 
only be used for a single purchase.
Raj is thoroughly unamused by this, but feels more secure in 
his decision to leave the last Event to Eliza (since she didn’t 
take it on her previous Action Round, he’s now convinced she 
holds no Debt threat cards—but, as we know, he’s mistaken). 
He decides to strike back with a Diplomatic offensive in Europe, 
selecting this Investment Tile:
He reveals The Cardinal Ministers and, to Eliza’s dismay, 
points out that he will get the maximum bonus of 3 
. He 
places an Exhausted marker on the card.
Raj can spend a whopping 7 
 this Action Round. First, he 
activates his Mediterranean Intrigue Advantage tile, placing 
an Exhausted marker on it and placing a Conflict marker in the 
British-flagged Alliance space in Austria. Next, he pays 3 
 
to remove the British flag from the 3-cost space in the German 
States, and a further 3 
 to flag it for himself. This gives him ac-
cess to the Central Europe Conflict Advantage, which he places 
in his player mat’s Advantages box. (He can’t use it this Action 
Round, since he just acquired it.) He then spends his last 
 to 
remove the British flag from the Alliance space in Austria; this 
costs only 1 
 because of the Conflict marker (which is also 
removed). Finally, he exhausts his Algonquin Raids Advantage 
to place a Conflict Marker in Albany, in the hopes of slowing 
Eliza down in North America.
With the Minor Military action, Raj looks longingly at Halifax, 
but doesn’t want to take on any more Debt. Instead, he buys a 
Bonus War Tile for 2 
, and hits the jackpot with “de Villars: 
+3”. He places it in the Jacobite Rebellion theater. This con-
cludes the 3rd French Action Round of turn 1.
Eliza decides she has waited long enough to teach the French 
about the importance of good financial management. Taking this 
Investment Tile, she immediately lays down Interest Payments:


--- PLAYBOOK PAGE 8 ---
Imperial Struggle ~ Playbook
8
© 2020 GMT Games, LLC
   
Raj has 2 Available Debt, to Eliza’s 3, so the Bonus Effect will 
trigger. Raj’s Debt Limit is immediately reduced by 1 (from 
6, where it started, to 5). He wasn’t at his Debt Limit, so Eliza 
doesn’t get any VP. But now Raj has only 1 Available Debt. 
Thanks to the Bonus Effect, Eliza reduces her own Debt by 2 
(to 1), giving her 5 Available Debt to play with.
With the Major Economic action afforded by the tile, Eliza 
makes a longer-term investment by flagging the West Bengal 
cotton market. While Cotton is not in Global Demand, the Silk 
Advantage this space grants will earn 1 VP from East India 
Company this turn in addition to its economic discount in India, 
and the India award this turn, while modest, is not nothing. 
Rather than take more Debt now, she lets the 3rd    go unspent.
The situation at the end of Action Round 3.


--- PLAYBOOK PAGE 9 ---
© 2020 GMT Games, LLC
Imperial Struggle ~ Playbook
9
Now for the Diplomatic Minor action. Eliza sorely needs to 
mend her position in Europe. The French are up 8-3 in Europe, 
with Court Of The Sun King showing for bonus VP on the 
Europe award (if Raj wins it it will be worth 2 VP and a Treaty 
Point). Additionally, Raj controls 3 Prestige spaces to her 2, so 
he will score an additional 2 VP if that situation persists through 
the end of the turn (see illustration at bottom of previous page).
So, incurring 1 Debt (to 2), she decides to spend 3 
 on the 
empty Prestige space in Austria. This ties up the Prestige space 
count, and will allow her access to the Silesia Negotiations Ad-
vantage, which might help her further reverse French political 
gains in Europe. This concludes Action Round 3 - each player 
will get only one more Action Round before the War of the 
Spanish Succession.
Raj surveys the remaining three tiles. The Economic Major ac-
tions tempt him, as he could contest Eliza’s dominance of the 
Caribbean commodities, but as she will have the final Action 
Round, she’ll be able to answer back equally. However, there 
is only one Diplomatic Major action left on the track. Choosing 
to accept defeat in the commodity trade this turn, Raj selects 
that tile, aiming to assemble an unbeatable European coalition 
to back the duc d’Anjou’s claim to both the Spanish and French 
crowns.
First, Raj activates his Central Europe Conflict Advantage, 
placing a Conflict Marker on British-flagged Sardinia. Eliza 
groans—with no Military actions remaining on the Investment 
Track, she won’t be able to remove it before war breaks out.
Next, using the 2 
 from the tile’s Minor Military Action, Raj 
buys a Bonus War Tile (recall that the actions on an Investment 
Tile can be taken in any order, except that Event play must come 
first). He does this first because he wants to see what his final 
tile strengths will be before negotiating additional alliances to 
bolster weak theaters (or go for a decisive victory where he is al-
ready strong). Unfortunately, it is “d’Artagnan: +1”—beneficial, 
but not the strongest in the pool. He assigns it to Central Europe.
With his 4 
, he decides to flag Denmark-Norway and Swe-
den (which puts him back in the lead for the Prestige bonus). 
Sweden’s alliance is not useful in the upcoming War, but Raj 
feels—perhaps overconfidently—that he has a sufficiently strong 
edge already. That concludes the 4th and final French Action 
Round of the first turn.
Eliza is left with two of the same tile, so there’s no choice: she 
takes one of them.
With 4 
 from an Economic Major action, Eliza decides to 
monopolize the Fish trade. She spends 3 
 to unflag Georges 
Bank (its cost is increased by 1 due to its being protected by 
the fort at Louisbourg) and then 2 
 to flag it herself, taking 1 
Debt in the process (now she has 3). She spends the 2 
 from 
the Diplomatic Minor action on the 2-cost Alliance space in 
Austria (that Raj had unflagged earlier).
Action Rounds are now over. The Reduce Treaty Points phase 
has no effect as neither player has more than 4 Treaty Points. 
There are no “end of turn” card abilities for either player to 
resolve, so that phase is skipped as well, prompting the begin-
ning of the Scoring phase.
North America is scored first. Eliza has 7 flags to Raj’s 5, but 
thanks to Algonquin Raids the British flag in Albany does not 
count for scoring. Since the 2 VP Award tile requires a margin 
of 2 flags to secure it, neither player wins the Award; it is placed 
aside, face up (it will not appear again until Turn 3 at the earliest, 
when each Region will once again receive 2 random Award tiles). 
The French win the Europe award and score 1 VP plus another 
for Court of the Sun King (VP = 17), and gain 1 Treaty Point 
(to 1). They also score the bonus 2 VP for controlling more 
Prestige spaces, as there are 4 French-flagged Prestige spaces 
(Sweden, one in Austria, one in Spain, and the Biscay Naval 
Space) to Britain’s 3 (the Dutch Republic, the Balearic Naval 
Space, and one space in Austria). The VP marker is moved to 19.
The Caribbean goes easily to the British (7 flags and Squadrons, 
to the French’s 4). It is not worth any VP, but the British gain 
1 Treaty Point (to 1).
India likewise goes to the British (they have 5 flags to France’s 
4), scoring 1 VP (VP = 18) and granting them a Treaty Point 
(they now have 2).
Next, Global Demand is scored. The British sweep all three 
awards, with 2 Fish (FR: 0); 2 Sugar (FR: 1), and 1 Tobacco 
(FR: 0). This yields 7 VP but does increase British Debt by 2 
(VP = 11, BR Debt = 5). Eliza also gets 1 VP  from East India 
Company for her Silk Advantage for a total of 8 VP(!). The VP 
total stands at 10.
The Victory Check phase yields no results, as the VP total is not 
0 or 30. Note, though, that had the British somehow been able 
to win the Europe and North America awards, they would have 
won an automatic victory during the Scoring Phase! (One of 
the automatic victory conditions is to win all four Regions and 
all commodities in Global Demand in a single peace turn.) But 
since the game continues, the War of the Spanish Succession 
must now be fought.


--- PLAYBOOK PAGE 10 ---
Imperial Struggle ~ Playbook
10
© 2020 GMT Games, LLC
The players reveal their War Tiles:
 Britain:
•	 +1 from tiles
•	 +1 from the Squadron in the Balearics
•	 The British alliance in Sardinia grants no strength, since it 
has a Conflict marker
•	 Total: 2
France also wins the Spain theater, by a margin of 2. This scores 
Raj 1 VP (VP to 13) and 1 CP, whereas Eliza takes another 2 
Treaty Points (total: 6). Raj spends the CP on Gibraltar, taking 
the Naval Bastion Advantage.
In Queen Anne’s War (the North American theater), the strength 
tallies thus:
  France:
•	 +2 from tiles
•	 +1 for Louisbourg
•	 +1 for the Conflict marker in British-flagged Albany
•	 Total: 4
 Britain:
•	 +2 from tiles
•	 Total: 2
France wins Queen Anne’s War by a margin of 2. Eliza breathes 
a sigh of relief, as this yields just 1 VP (VP to 14) and no addi-
tional territorial gains. Her Military Upgrade during the previous 
Action Phase stopped a French steamroll.
Finally, the fate of the Jacobite cause must be resolved.
Eliza winces—while she established a very strong economic 
position on turn 1, she is fairly outclassed on the battlefield. 
The first theater to resolve is Central Europe. Britain takes 1 
Debt immediately from the French “BR Debt +1 / 0” tile. This 
places Eliza at her Debt Limit, so she has to hope there are no 
more unexpected military expenses in the other Theaters. The 
strength ends up as follows:
  France:
•	 +2 from tiles
•	 +4 from alliance spaces (Bavaria, German States, Savoy, 
Denmark-Norway)
•	 Total: 6
 Britain:
•	 +1 from tiles
•	 +1 from alliance spaces (Austria)
•	 Total: 2
The French win the Central Europe theater by a margin of 4. 
This yields 2 VP (VP = 12) and 1 Conquest Point. Raj decides 
to use the Conquest Point to seize San Agustin, whose Fruit 
Advantage will help him claw back a position in the Caribbean. 
Eliza gets 2 Treaty Points (for a total of 4).
In Spain, the strength tallies as follows:
  France:
•	 +1 from tiles
•	 +1 for the Squadron in Biscay
•	 +1 for the Governance keyword
•	 +1 for alliance spaces (Spain)
•	 Total: 4


--- PLAYBOOK PAGE 11 ---
© 2020 GMT Games, LLC
Imperial Struggle ~ Playbook
11
  France:
•	 +2 from tiles (and Britain must lose a flag in Europe—Raj 
chooses the Dutch Republic flag)
•	 +1 from Alliance spaces (Ireland… but see below!)
•	 +1 for the Style keyword (the Jacobites are so romantic!)
•	 +1 for the Conflict marker in British-flagged Sardinia
•	 Total: 5
 Britain:
•	 –1 from tiles (for her tile’s extra effect, Eliza chooses to 
remove Raj’s flag in Ireland, so he won’t benefit from its 
strength in this theater)
•	 Total: –1
With the adjustment of the French total strength to 4, owing to the 
loss of the flag in the Ireland alliance space, France nonetheless 
wins the Jacobite Rebellion of 1715 by a margin of 5. This scores 
4 VP for the French (VP = 18). Britain receives 2 Treaty Points 
(total: 8). Raj also places a Jacobite Victory marker on the Turn 
Track; this will make #M-4 Jacobite Uprisings  more effective.
The French won all four theaters in the War, but they do not 
win an automatic victory (since to do so they would have had 
to win all four theaters with the maximum possible margin of 
victory). In the Victory Check Phase following the war, no 
victory is earned (in fact, the VP total is only 3 points away 
from where it was at the start of the game, as France’s military 
success modestly outweighed Britain’s mercantile dominance). 
The players now proceed to the Reset Phase. They return all 
of their Basic War tiles to their player mats (except for the one 
Eliza removed from the game thanks to her Military Upgrade), 
remove the Bonus War tiles for the War of the Spanish Succes-
sion from the game, and add the Bonus War Tiles for the War of 
the Austrian Succession to the appropriate box on their player 
mats. The Conflict markers in Albany and Austria are removed.
Then, in the War Layout Phase, the players return the War of the 
Spanish Succession display to the box, and set up the next War: 
the War of the Austrian Succession. Placing it by the board, they 
draw 4 Basic War Tiles each from their player mats, and place 
them face down in the new War’s theaters. They are now ready 
to begin turn 2, the second half of the Succession Era!
DESIGN NOTE: The British did very well with Regional 
awards and Global Demand, and have a large stock of Treaty 
Points for the next turn. Eliza will be able to make some big 
moves, and may feel quite tempted to go second in turn 2. 
The French, though, increased their board presence through 
conquest, and those flags will be difficult for the British to 
contest. They also control powerful political Advantages in 
Europe. It’s anyone’s game thus far… if you’ve been playing 
along with this example, feel free to continue the game, or 
start one of your own!
 
          
A Note On Flags
The 18th century hosted a blossoming of military and 
civil institutions in both France and Britain; this bridge 
between the Renaissance and modern eras meant that 
armies and firms started to take on the scale and official-
dom of modern states, but retained the personalized flavor 
of earlier times.
For the British, the most obvious evolution of its national 
flag was the combination in 1707 of the Cross of St. George 
and the Saltire of St. Andrew, representing the unified 
thrones. The Saltire of St. Patrick would not be added until 
1801, when Ireland joined what would then be called the 
United Kingdom. Imperial Struggle uses the 1707 flag for 
the British control markers—and for the Squadrons, despite 
the availability of the British naval ensign, whereon the 
predominance of white would cause readability problems 
for players. The British East India Company flag, flown 
around the world as the British Empire’s reach expanded, 
bore a strong resemblance to the Grand Union flag that the 
United States briefly flew prior to 1777, when thirteen stars 
on a blue field replaced the Union cross.
The French have a more complicated story. The Bourbon 
battle flag was clean white; while this may invite jokes, the 
way military forces would signal surrender was to show 
the enemy’s colors—and a great many military forces sur-
rendered to France, thus waving the white flag. Only when 
a royal was present would the golden fleurs-de-lis also 
grace the standard, and that was rare. For these reasons, 
as well as for game readability, we have chosen the blue 
Capetian standard adorned with fleurs-de-lis as the French 
flag used to signify space control on the map. It was not 
unheard of for an army to fly this flag (see Henri Félix Em-
manuel Philippoteaux, The Battle of Fontenoy, 1745: The 
Confrontation between the French and the Allies, 1873, on 
page 20 of the Rulebook) or the variant with three larger 
golden fleurs-de-lis.
The French East India Company’s flag is, similarly, a 
challenge to find. Very few French flags from the era survive 
today; most of the images one can find are artists’ interpreta-
tions from across the 19th and 20th centuries. The details 
of the flag are in the Company’s charter, and we’ve chosen 
the interpretation that we think has the strongest likelihood 
of matching the historical one. The French naval ensign 
is more intricate and designed than the British one, but it 
certainly expresses the spirit and glory of the Sun King.
We hope you keep the spirit of how these two mighty 
adversaries chose to represent themselves on land and sea 
in mind as you play Imperial Struggle!


--- PLAYBOOK PAGE 12 ---
Imperial Struggle ~ Playbook
12
© 2020 GMT Games, LLC
Complex Action Round
This example covers a single French Action Round that refer-
ences most of the rules around Action Point expenditure.
EXAMPLE: It is Turn 6. 
Raj, playing France, selects an Investment tile 
with 3 
 and a 2 
 Minor Military action. 
He plays #36 Wealth Of Nations, and reveals #M-26 Lavoisier 
for its Scholarship keyword, which will activate the bonus ef-
fect on Wealth Of Nations. First, Raj reduces his Debt by 
2, as directed by Wealth of Nations. The bonus effect is 3 
. 
Normally, Event card effects must be fully resolved before 
spending any Action Points from the selected Investment tile 
(5.2, step 2), but extra Action Points are an exception – they 
may be spent alongside those from the Investment tile, in any 
order the player desires. So, Raj now has 3 
, 4 
, and 3 
 
to spend – the latter two increased by 1 apiece from their base 
values on the Investment tile, as indicated by Lavoisier. Focus-
ing first on the Caribbean, Raj decides to spend the  first, using 
two of them to remove the Conflict marker in Puerto Principe. 
The third is wasted, since only one expenditure may be made 
with a Minor Action. Now that he has a Market adjacent to 
Puerto Rico, he spends just 1 
 to remove the Isolated British 
flag in Puerto Rico (5.4.2). (Note that this is OK per 5.4.1, since 
Raj already had a flag in Puerto Principe to confer adjacency at 
the start of the Action Round—and now it no longer contains 
a Conflict marker.)
Continuing on, Raj now activates his Letters of Marque Advan-
tage, and uses it to place a Conflict marker in Bahamas Run West. 
(Since it is British-flagged, it is unprotected; French fleets do 
not protect British flags from pirates.) This will also Isolate the 
British flag in Bahamas Run North at the start of the next Action 
Round (remember that Isolation doesn’t set in until the start of 
a new AR, 5.4.1). But Raj can still take advantage, and spends 
another 1 
 to unflag Bahamas Run West (discounted due to 
the Conflict marker, 5.4.2). This change in control removes the 
Conflict marker. With 1  left Raj now takes 1 Debt (thank you 
Further Examples


--- PLAYBOOK PAGE 13 ---
© 2020 GMT Games, LLC
Imperial Struggle ~ Playbook
13
Adam Smith) to make 1 additional 
, and with these he flags 
Bahamas Run West for himself.
Looking at the board, Raj feels that he has improved his position 
(and, by Isolating one of their flags, opened a threat that the Brit-
ish must at least consider answering), but does not wish to spend 
his 4 
 in the Caribbean. (For one thing, he can’t—he already 
controls Letters of Marque, and Pirate Havens would only cost 
2 
.) So he switches regions to Europe. He spends 2 
 to 
flag Sweden and the other 2 
 to flag the 2-cost Prestige space 
in Spain. Note that he does not pay extra for switching Regions 
(5.3.4), since he did not spend any 
 anywhere but Europe.
Damaged Fort Example
Eliza, playing France on turn 4, has selected an Investment tile 
with 4 
 and 2 
. Fish is in Global Demand this turn, and she 
sees an opportunity in North America. The British control Louis-
bourg, having built it on a prior turn, but it was damaged by one 
of Eliza’s War tiles during King George’s War. She spends all 4 
of her 
 to unflag Louisbourg—the cost is 3 (the number printed 
in Louisbourg’s space), plus 1 (since repairing and seizing an 
opposing damaged Fort costs an extra 
, 5.6.4 2nd bullet). Note 
that the French flag in Acadia does not provide the adjacency 
needed to repair a Fort (ibid), but Eliza’s Squadron in the Cabot 
Strait does. She removes both the British flag and the Damaged 
Fort marker in Louisbourg and places her own flag there. Next, 
she spends the 2  from her Minor Action to flag Georges Bank, 
which she can now do thanks to the newly-adjacent French 
Fort. In this way, she was able to improve her Fish holding us-
ing a Minor Action (unflagging Northeast Channel would not 
be permitted with a Minor Action), and for a low cost as well. 
Note also that the Fort need not have been adjacent at the start 
of the Action Round; only other Markets have this requirement 
in order to confer adjacency (5.4.1, second Design Note).
GUIDE FOR CDG PLAYERS
Imperial Struggle twists some of the rules and mechanics 
that CDG aficionados are used to. Here is a rundown of 
some elements those players should keep in mind:
•	 In Imperial Struggle, Event cards that get played as 
Events are always removed from the game. This is in 
contrast to most CDGs, including Twilight Struggle, 
in which Events that get played as such are removed 
only if there’s an asterisk or other markup indicating 
that they are one-time occurrences.
•	 When the Revolution Era begins, don’t forget to remove 
all the Succession Era cards from the game—includ-
ing from the draw pile and players’ hands. (Of course, 
you can just remove and re-draw any Succession Era 
cards as they are drawn, rather than removing them all 
immediately in Turn 5’s Deck Phase.)
•	 Investment tiles that have the Event symbol allow the 
play of an Event in addition to the Action Points granted 
by the tile. In most CDGs, players face a strict choice 
between playing an Event and spending action points 
(or operations points, command points, etc).
•	 Play order isn’t fixed in Imperial Struggle. Instead, the 
initiative is determined by the VP total. And the player 
with initiative doesn’t necessarily go first – they choose 
who does.
•	 The three different types of Action Points— 
,  
 and 
 —all have different uses and roles in the game. Most 
CDGs have a single action point type with a single list 
of ways they can be spent.
•	 Daisy-chaining control of spaces is allowed in more 
cases than in Twilight Struggle and others. You can’t 
flag a Market and immediately grab a newly-adjacent 
one, but you can do so if the first space you flag was 
instead a Fort or Naval Space.


--- PLAYBOOK PAGE 14 ---
Imperial Struggle ~ Playbook
14
© 2020 GMT Games, LLC
Historical Background
Succession Era: Event and Ministry Cards
Event Cards:
#1 Carnatic War: Both France and Britain found themselves 
drawn into—or instigating—intrigue and conflict between the 
Mughal princes and other rulers of eastern India (particularly 
the Nizams of Hyderabad). On several occasions these conflicts 
erupted into open warfare, resulting in territorial and economic 
gains for the Europeans. 
DESIGN NOTE: Like some other Event cards (e.g., War of 
Jenkins’ Ear), the Carnatic War card is in the Succession 
deck even though the significant Carnatic wars took place 
during the Empire Era. This is because they might have hap-
pened earlier, and because they are known for fueling wider 
conflicts like the War of the Austrian Succession. Giving 
them a better chance to precede those conflicts enriches the 
historical texture of the game. 
#2 Acts of Union: The 1707 unification of the English and 
Scottish thrones marked a watershed in British political history; 
although the two kingdoms had shared monarchs before, the 
British government’s prime aim of ensuring that Scotland could 
not ally against it demanded that each’s head of state should 
always be one individual. Scotland, for its own part, seemed 
largely opposed to union, but financial considerations prompted 
its delegates to ratify the initial Act. Scotland would nonetheless 
remain a hotbed of Jacobite support for several decades.
#3 Tropical Diseases: The biggest risk to anyone serving 
in the West Indies, whether in the naval or merchant services, 
was disease. Biting insects and other parasites were (and are) 
persistent disease vectors; as with the rest of the New World, 
native populations also suffered heavily from newly-introduced 
European ailments. Additionally, African slaves brought across 
the Atlantic introduced new tropical diseases native to Africa, 
to which both Europeans and native Caribbean peoples were 
vulnerable. This increased the price of slaves and further drove 
the growth of the slave trade.
#4 South Sea Speculation: The South Sea Company (so 
named because of its trading rights with South America—not 
the South Pacific!) was able to persuade the British government 
to allow it to take on government debt; the Bank of England had 
previously been the only institution permitted to do so. Once the 
war with France ended, the South Sea directors drove a specu-
lative rush around the company’s potential profits from South 
American trade; they also saw a need to compete with Law’s 
success at the Banque Royale in France. But when it became 
clear there was no path to these profits, the stock price crashed 
and ruined thousands of investors. Walpole built a good chunk 
of his reputation on his skillful salvaging of the crisis, although 
there was still widespread misery and ruin.
#5 War of Jenkins’ Ear: Allegedly 
precipitated by the “de-earing” of Rob-
ert Jenkins, a British naval officer, when 
a Spanish frigate searched his ship, the 
War of Jenkins’ Ear represented a 
power play by the South Sea Company 
and the British government to make 
inroads into Spanish holdings in the 
Caribbean. Of particular note was the 
Anson Expedition, in which British 
Commodore George Anson, charged 
with causing havoc in the Caribbean, ended up forced into the 
Pacific and sailing all the way to China. He redeemed this 
lengthy voyage by capturing a huge Spanish treasure fleet in the 
Philippines and returned to England around the Cape of Good 
Hope, thus circumnavigating the globe.
#6 Native American Alliances: Britain and France both 
forged extensive relationships with Native Americans, using 
treaties and economic exchange as well as exploiting long-
standing tribal rivalries to build support among the tribes. France 
eventually cultivated the stronger relationship, in particular 
due to its de-emphasis of religious conversion, but both sides 
relied on Native scouts, guides, and raiders in all of their North 
American conflicts.
#7 Austro-Spanish Rivalry: These 
two realms were constantly at odds over 
almost every issue imaginable: trade, 
territory, port rights, and European rela-
tions. Each wanted unified rule under 
their own throne, although this desire 
weakened more and more as the cen-
tury went on. To these ends they often 
dealt and quarreled with France and 
Britain; for example, Charles VI aggres-
sively pursued Dutch trading opportuni-
ties, which gave him bargaining power against the British; and 
Isabella Farnese’s intrigues against the Orléans regency led to 
a French invasion of Spain during the War of the Quadruple 
Alliance.
#8 Tax Reform: Both Britain and France sought to clarify and 
streamline their tax systems throughout the 18th century, using 
a variety of creative tactics and schemes to overcome centuries 
of entrenched privilege and traditions of tax avoidance. The 
ability to raise revenue was key to the infrastructure and mili-
tary progression that both kingdoms craved; Britain’s gradual 
advantage in this area would become a decisive one during the 
Industrial Revolution.
#9 Great Northern War: The rivalry between Sweden and 
Russia over who would dominate the Baltic was a major issue in 
continental European politics, although both Britain and France 
would spend most of it distracted by the War of the Spanish Suc-
cession. Elector George of Hanover—the future King George 


--- PLAYBOOK PAGE 15 ---
© 2020 GMT Games, LLC
Imperial Struggle ~ Playbook
15
I of Great Britain—sided with Russia. The Swedish defeat at 
Poltava in 1709 would end their ambitions on the opposite side 
of the Baltic, although future Swedish monarchs would make 
their own attempts later in the 1700s. 
#10 Vatican Politics: The Papacy didn’t play as central a role 
in the politics of the 18th century as it had in the preceding two, 
but religious considerations still swayed decisions and drove 
intrigue. The Church could still marshal massive support, or 
quiet rumblings of dissent, with displays of favor and recogni-
tion. Perhaps most important was its implicit recognition of 
the House of Hanover and George I as the legitimate ruler of 
Great Britain in 1766, a move that put an end to serious Jacobite 
threats. And, of course, when the Bastille fell, the Papacy saw 
the anti-clericalism of the Revolution as a serious threat.
#11 Calico Acts: The Calico Acts banned the import of cotton 
textiles into England. They were supported by British textile 
mill owners, who had difficulty competing with the volume and 
variety of textiles that the East India Company could ship from 
Bengal. Like most import restrictions, the Acts led to a huge 
wave of smuggling.
#12 Military Spending Overruns: Wars are incredibly ex-
pensive, and bankrupted more than one 18th-century monarch 
(and 17th, and 16th…). The military needs for the empires both 
kingdoms sought to build were enormous, and came at enormous 
financial cost. France spent an astonishing 4 million livres on 
the fortress of Louisbourg alone during the 18th century; Britain 
was able to double the size of its navy by taking on extensive 
government debt.
#13 Alberoni’s Ambition: Giulio Alberoni was a cardinal who, 
like Fleury and Dubois, formed strong political relationships 
in a European court. Alberoni, however, did so in the Spanish 
royal court, and came to be trusted by Isabella Farnese, queen 
to Philip V of Spain. Since the War of the Spanish Succession 
was about Philip’s right to inherit both the Spanish and French 
thrones, this put Alberoni at the center of much intrigue. His 
service to the ambitious Isabella led him to attempt recapture of 
Spanish territory lost to Austria and Savoy during the war. When 
the Sun King died, and the duc d’Orléans became regent to the 
boy king Louis XV, Alberoni initiated the Cellamare Conspiracy 
to undermine Orléans and replace him as regent with his own 
master, Philip V—in this way he might have de facto reversed 
the result of the War of the Spanish Succession. 
#14 Famine In Ireland: In 1740 a 
catastrophic cold snap wiped out both 
the grain and potato crops in Ireland. 
This was then followed by an equally 
disastrous drought that destroyed the 
remaining edible crops. Aid efforts were 
hindered by out-of-season ice that 
snarled harbors and blocked wharves. 
Despite eventual food aid from Ameri-
ca, roughly a third of the island’s popu-
lation starved to death.
#15 Interest Payments: The payment of interest on debt had 
become common in Europe during the Renaissance. While 
monarchs often felt tempted to default on debt, just to avoid 
mounting interest payments, they knew this would affect their 
ability to borrow in the future.
Ministry Cards:
#M-1 The Cardinal Ministers: Guillaume Dubois and 
André-Hercule Fleury continued the tradition of service as 
Chief Minister to the French king (that Richelieu and Mazarin 
started). Both focused on stabilizing European relations (even 
to the extent of formal alliance with Britain!), limiting other 
powers’ ambitions, and solid finance. Fleury in particular over-
saw three decades of peace between the two Succession wars 
in Imperial Struggle.
#M-2 John Law: A Scottish natural philosopher (what we’d 
now call an economist), Law was charged with rehabilitating 
France’s finances after the War of the Spanish Succession. 
He succeeded, to an extent; although his fiat currency system 
collapsed, his other reforms (particularly those that developed 
France’s mercantile infrastructure) enabled his political succes-
sors to cement a degree of financial stability.
#M-3 Court of the Sun King: Ver-
sailles started out as a hunting lodge; that 
changed dramatically. In 1661 Louis XIV 
began expanding it, and took up full-time 
residence in the 1680s, transforming it 
into the jewel of Europe. He wanted to 
disrupt conventions and arrangements in 
Paris, and recenter the royal court en-
tirely on himself. Its lavish gardens and 
accommodations impressed ambassadors 
and courtiers from most of Europe.
#M-4 Jacobite Uprisings: The large uprisings of 1715 and 
1745 that aimed to undo the Glorious Revolution and restore the 
Stuart dynasty to the English throne are the most well-known 
Jacobite rebellions, but in fact the Jacobites contrived a seem-
ingly endless procession of plots, intrigues, and smaller revolts 
for most of the first half of the 18th century. The Jacobite cause 
was only truly extinguished when the Papacy recognized the 
House of Hanover as legitimate rulers of England and Scotland; 
the resulting collapse of Catholic support for the Stuart cause 
put a permanent end to Jacobite ambitions.
#M-5 Robert Walpole: Regarded by many as Britain’s first 
true prime minister, Walpole served three monarchs and wrung 
reasonable consensus from a fractious Cabinet and Parliament. 
Eventually eclipsed by Pitt the Elder, Walpole created a legacy 
of stability and charted a successful political course for Britain 
for decades.
#M-6 Jonathan Swift: An Irish essayist and critic, Swift is 
best known for Gulliver’s Travels and A Modest Proposal, both 
of which combine imaginative prose with cutting political com-
mentary. He was influential on both sides of Britain’s political 
divide, although his advocacy for Ireland sometimes put him 
out of favor.


--- PLAYBOOK PAGE 16 ---
Imperial Struggle ~ Playbook
16
© 2020 GMT Games, LLC
#M-7 East India Company: Chartered 
in 1600, the British East India Company 
struggled for—and eventually se-
cured—British economic and military 
dominance over India and the East In-
dies. Its success rippled back into poli-
tics and society back home, as newly 
wealthy traders and company officers 
bought estates, married well-born la-
dies, and ran for Parliament.
#M-8 Bank of England: The Bank started out as a tool to 
facilitate the government debt necessary to finance naval ex-
pansion. Privately run until the 1960s, it issued new coinage 
and paper currency (on which it had a monopoly) and ran a 
conventional banking business as well, loaning to the public. A 
stable holder of government debt, it provided monetary stabil-
ity and consistency that allowed Britain to gradually accrue a 
substantial financial advantage over France.
#M-9 New World Huguenots: In all their North American 
struggles against the British, the French faced a persistent disad-
vantage: population. The British practice of sending criminals, 
indentured servants, and especially religious dissenters to distant 
colonies never caught on in France. Louis feared the creation of 
a distant and potentially disloyal critical mass of Protestants, and 
of course he could not stomach religious dissent in any case. But 
it might not have been so; and the French colonies in Canada 
and Acadia might have been able to compete with the British 
ones in terms of local militia and logistics.
#M-10 Edmond Halley: Known mostly for the comet whose 
behavior he described, Halley was one of the Royal Society’s 
brightest lights in the 18th century. He did trailblazing work 
in engineering (inventing the diving bell), mathematics (some 
regard him as the founder of actuarial science), and navigation. 
Along with the securing of the Spanish slave-trading contract, 
the asiento, Halley’s innovations paved the way for the British 
naval ascendancy of the next two centuries.
War of the Spanish Succession:  
Tile Background
 BRITISH WAR TILES
John Churchill, Duke of Marlborough 
(“Queen Anne’s Captain”) was unquestion-
ably one of Britain’s greatest military leaders. 
His skill at maneuver, tactics, and siegecraft 
secured important victories at Blenheim, Ra-
millies, and Oudenarde, and ultimately prevented the creation 
of a unified Franco-Spanish superpower.
Sir George Rooke, a veteran naval officer of the Nine Years’ 
War, was Admiral of the Fleet (the highest rank in the British 
Navy) by the time the War of the Spanish Succession began. He 
decisively destroyed a Spanish treasure fleet at Vigo Bay and led 
the successful expedition against Gibraltar, cementing British 
power in the Mediterranean for generations.
United Parliament: The two chief antagonists of Imperial 
Struggle differed in many ways, but one of the most important 
was in governance, where the King of England (and, shortly 
into the game, Scotland) shared power with an often fractious 
Parliament. When intrigue ran high between the Whigs and 
Tories, British policy was adversely affected; conversely, when 
they could work together, Britain was stronger.
Benjamin Church was a military leader in the British colony 
at Plymouth. He was one of the first European officers to recruit 
Native Americans into irregular combat units, and to success-
fully integrate European arms with Native tactics. 
Prince Eugene of Savoy (“The Greatest 
General”) led the Imperialist forces at every 
crucial moment of the war. He played important 
roles in Northern Italy, the Rhine campaigns, 
and in the Low Countries. His command of the 
right wing at Blenheim enabled Marlborough’s key break-
through. It is impossible to overstate the role he played in the 
war’s course.
Leopold I: The Holy Roman Emperor at the start of the war, 
Leopold I, saw an opportunity—he could leverage the rest of 
Europe’s opposition to Bourbon dynastic union between France 
and Spain to combine the Hapsburg holdings in Austria and 
Spain, as they had been under Charles V. He was unsuccessful 
in this, and did not survive the war.
Louis William, margrave of Baden-Baden, fought alongside 
Prince Eugene against the Turks in the 1680s. In the War of the 
Spanish Succession he was defeated by Villars but came back 
to play a key diversionary role in the campaign that culminated 
in the Battle of Blenheim. A great Austrian general in his own 
right, his legacy is much less noted than Eugene’s.
Huguenot Rebels: Louis XIV’s revocation of the Edict of 
Nantes had long-lasting repercussions for France, including the 
Camisard rebellion that began in 1702 and lasted for most of 
the war. Huguenot guerrillas massacred Catholics and engaged 
in pitched battle against the royal army, diverting attention and 
resources from the rest of the war. Even Villars commanded 
against the rebels for a time, an indication of how serious this 
distraction became.
Henri de Massue, marquis de Rouvigny and Earl of Galway, 
forever left French service when Louis XIV revoked the Edict 
of Nantes. He settled in Ireland, receiving an Irish title, and 
fought for Britain in both the Nine Years’ War and the War of 
the Spanish Succession. 
Savoy Defects: In 1702, Victor Amadeus, Duke of Savoy, saw 
an opportunity to change sides and join the Grand Alliance. He 
feared domination by the unified French and Spanish thrones 
in the event of their victory, and the stalemate in northern Italy 
provided him a key bargaining chip to offer Leopold. Savoy’s 
defection complicated the French strategic problems in Central 
Europe, to say the least.
Prize Hunting: The prize system encouraged initiative and ag-
gression among British naval officers, but it could also distract 
them from strategic objectives.


--- PLAYBOOK PAGE 17 ---
© 2020 GMT Games, LLC
Imperial Struggle ~ Playbook
17
Foot Guards: British Foot Guards, Horse Guards, and Grena-
dier Guards all served in the War of the Spanish Succession. 
Considered the elite of the army, they fought widely and with 
distinction.
  FRENCH WAR TILES
Claude Louis Hector de Villars, marquis et 
duc de Villars (“Savior of France”) was the 
most important and successful French army 
leader in the War of the Spanish Succession. 
At Malplaquet (1710) his forces inflicted over 
20,000 Allied casualties for 8,000 French; although the battle 
was a tactical defeat due to the loss of several key fortresses, 
Villars’ victory at Denain two years later guaranteed his monarch 
an honorable peace.
Louis Joseph, duc de Vendôme, was the com-
mander most responsible for the many Aus-
trian setbacks in the early portion of the War 
of the Spanish Succession. He defeated Prince 
Eugene of Savoy on several occasions, and 
proved a highly worthy adversary for the Duke of Marlborough. 
His greatest victory came in Spain, however, where he smashed 
the Allied forces at Villaviciosa and ended the Hapsburgs’ hopes 
for the Spanish throne.
Louis François de Boufflers, duc de Boufflers, was highly re-
spected by both King Louis XIV and the British for his bravery 
and tenacity, but he had mixed success during his long service. 
However, at Malplaquet he showed remarkable humility and 
judgment when he subordinated himself to Villars, ensuring 
unity of command in that crucial battle.
The Maison du Roi was the royal household force of Louis 
XIV. Its troops served with great distinction throughout the war.
Cádiz Refused: One of Admiral Rooke’s few setbacks, the 
Anglo-Dutch attempt to seize the fortresses of Cádiz and St. 
Matagorda in 1702 was crippled by inter-service rivalry and a 
stout and imaginative Spanish defense.
René de Froulay de Tessé, comte de Tessé, seems to have been 
one of the unluckiest of the war’s French generals. Frustrated 
in his well-planned attempts to seize Gibraltar and Barcelona, 
de Tessé finally found success in the south of France, where he 
stopped the advance of Prince Eugene at Toulon. Unfortunately, 
the French naval squadron there had already been scuttled, 
just in case Eugene’s siege had succeeded. With Gibraltar still 
in British hands this struck the final blow to French hopes of 
contesting the Mediterranean.
James FitzJames, Duke of Berwick, was the nephew of Marl-
borough and a devoted Jacobite. He fought on his father James’ 
side in the Glorious Revolution of 1688 and entered the service 
of the Sun King. In the War of the Spanish Succession he fought 
brilliantly in Spain, winning a crucial victory at Almanza in 
1707. He survived the war in good health and led the Sun King’s 
armies in both the War of the Quadruple Alliance and the War 
of the Polish Succession. 
Victor-Marie d’Estrées, duc d’Estrées earned his monarch’s 
gratitude by securing the dual thrones of Sicily for Philip V of 
Spain; had the Sun King’s ultimate ambitions worked out, the 
Two Sicilies would have been another part of the combined 
Franco-Spanish dynasty.
Pierre de Montesquiou, comte d’Artagnan was a musketeer 
and a hero of Malplaquet. His cousin Charles was the model 
for Alexandre Dumas’ literary hero, which immortalized their 
family title.
Ultima Ratio Regum: Louis XIV engraved this motto, literally 
“the final argument of kings”, on his cannon, to emphasize his 
view that disputes between nations could always be resolved 
by force.
Musketeers: The blue tabards of the Royal Musketeers are 
familiar to anyone who’s read the work of Alexandre Dumas, 
which raised their status from merely prestigious to legendary. 
Service with the Musketeers was reserved for nobles.
Crack Troops: The French army was the most feared force in 
the world at this time, experienced and well-funded. It featured 
many elite units of various types, from dragoons to grenadiers 
to siege batteries.
Empire Era: Event and Ministry Cards
Event Cards:
#16 Caribbean Slave Unrest: The lot of a slave in a Caribbean 
plantation was grim. Disease, awful working conditions, and 
boundless cruelty made for the saying “sold down the river”—
an allusion to the fate of a slave sent to the Caribbean from the 
USA, and often a threat as well. Unrest wracked the Caribbean 
during the 18th century, with uprisings in Martinique, Guade-
loupe, Jamaica, Antigua, and most of the other plantation islands.
#17 Pacte de Famille: With the end of Hapsburg rule in Spain 
and his crown secure, Philip V (born duc d’Anjou) sought to 
establish Bourbon control of other Mediterranean territories, 
forming an agreement with his nephew Louis XV. This opened 
the door for the British to re-invigorate their successful alliance 
with Austria, who had no intention of relinquishing territory the 
Hapsburgs had ruled for generations just to enrich the children 
of Philip’s ambitious queen, Elizabeth Farnese.
#18 Byng’s Trial: Admiral John 
Byng’s decision not to land troops at 
Minorca in the face of a numerically 
superior French ground force (and 
equivalent naval opposition as well) 
cost him his life. The court-martial and 
execution are largely seen today as a 
farce and an exercise in scapegoating; 
unfortunately for Byng, Pitt was unable 
to secure clemency (due largely to Pitt’s 
enmity with King George). The saying 
pour encourager les autres comes from Voltaire’s characteristi-
cally sharp satirical pen (“it is good to kill an admiral from time 
to time, to encourage the others.”)


--- PLAYBOOK PAGE 18 ---
Imperial Struggle ~ Playbook
18
© 2020 GMT Games, LLC
#19 Le Beau Monde: The 18th century saw an explosion of 
style, etiquette, and manner. France was unquestionably the cen-
ter of the fashion world, although Louis’ policies drove a number 
of Huguenot designers and dressmakers to London. Eventually, 
Britain would mount a serious challenge to this dominance, but 
not until the 19th century, when Beau Brummell’s “dandyism” 
began to take over men’s fashion in particular.
#20 Hyder Ali: The Sultan of Mysore from 1760 to his death 
in 1782, Hyder Ali built his realm into a regional power. His 
rivalries with the Marathas to the north, the Nizam of Hyderabad 
to the northeast, and the Europeans, and his ability to profit from 
all of them, cemented his legacy as one of southern India’s most 
effective rulers. Before he became sultan (by means of a coup 
against Khande Rao, a former retainer who had used British as-
sistance to take the throne for himself), Ali led Mysore’s troops 
in most of the important campaigns in India, primarily on the 
side of the French.
#21 Co-Hong System:  British and French trade with the Qing 
in China was in its infancy at this time, although other European 
powers such as Portugal and the Netherlands had made earlier 
inroads. The Qing government managed trade with Europe 
through a system called “co-hong”, after the mercantile associa-
tions that conducted trade in China’s coastal cities.
#22 Corsican Crisis: After the Seven Years’ War, France 
sought to make up its territorial losses. Choiseul’s eye alighted 
on Corsica, whose new regime found itself increasingly isolated 
due in part to its liberalism. When France invaded in 1768, the 
British government vacillated on the subject of intervention, 
despite other European states’ unhappiness with the naked ag-
gression France was showing. Ultimately France was able to 
finalize the conquest, but Britain remembered its failure during 
the French Revolution, when it attempted to once again separate 
Corsica from France.
#23 European Panic: Financial panics were common through-
out the 18th century, varying in severity and scope. Their causes 
were legion: fear of royal seizure of funds (in 1640, for example, 
Charles I simply seized all of the gold being stored by private 
goldsmiths for their clients at the Royal Mint), paper currency 
volatility, under-developed insurance markets that caused major 
institutions to fail on short notice, simple government misman-
agement of debt, frequent wars and debt devaluation, and so 
forth. The situation improved as the century went on, but of 
course financial crises are still with us today.
#24 West African Gold Mining: Disease and harsh terrain 
would defer the “Scramble for Africa” until the late 1800s, but 
the west coast of Africa was dotted with trading posts, slave 
depots, and—sparsely but importantly—gold mining concerns. 
While this production came nowhere near the amount of gold 
looted by Spain from the Mesoamerican cultures it conquered, 
gold trickled from West Africa into the European economy for 
decades.
#25 War of the Quadruple Alli-
ance: In response to Alberoni and 
Farnese’s resolute efforts to overturn the 
result of the War of the Spanish Succes-
sion, Britain and France actually allied 
together (along with Austria and the 
Dutch Republic) to contain these ambi-
tions. Britain scored two important 
naval victories at Cape Passaro and 
Vigo, and Alberoni’s removal from 
court by a disappointed Philip V al-
lowed France to breathe much easier.
#26 Salon d’Hercule: The “Hercules Room” or “Hercules 
Lounge” is one of the most striking chambers in Versailles. 
More intimate than the Hall of Mirrors and completed in 1736, it 
served an important diplomatic role for Louis XV—its opulence, 
in particular the stunning art that adorns it, served as a reminder 
to envoys of France’s vast wealth, power, and cultural influence.
#27 Bengal Famine: The Bengal Famine of 1770 devastated 
the British-dominated territories in northeastern India, killing 
10 million. Entire cities and small realms starved; the resulting 
disease and banditry only multiplied the misery. While drought 
and crop failure precipitated the disaster, there is no doubt that 
the short-sighted and extractive policies of the British East 
India Company, as well as the devastation of two major wars 
in quick succession, turned what might have been a relatively 
mild episode into a catastrophe.
#28 Father le Loutre: Father Jean-Louis Le Loutre, a mis-
sionary priest in Acadia (modern day Nova Scotia), found him-
self appointed the military leader of the Acadians, M’ikmaq, and 
other native allies when the British seized Louisbourg during 
King George’s War (part of the War of the Austrian Succession). 
This unlikely guerrilla leader orchestrated raids on British ports 
and posts for years, but was ultimately defeated at Fort Beau-
séjour in 1752. He spent the rest of his life trying to help the 
Acadians, deported from their homes by the victorious British, 
resettle elsewhere in Canada.
#29 War of the Polish Succession: 
The death of Augustus II, the King of 
Poland (by election, not birth) prompt-
ed a succession struggle between three 
candidates: Stanislaw I, who had been 
crowned with Swedish support during 
the Great Northern War but fled when 
Sweden was defeated; Augustus III, the 
son of the deceased King; and Infante 
Manuel, a Portuguese Hapsburg prince. 
Britain stayed out, which greatly 
strained its alliance with Austria (and may have precipitated the 
eventual end of that alliance). But by backing Stanislaw France 
seized the opportunity to trim back Hapsburg influence and 
regain some territory previously lost, even though Stanislaw 
ultimately had to cede the throne to Augustus III.


--- PLAYBOOK PAGE 19 ---
© 2020 GMT Games, LLC
Imperial Struggle ~ Playbook
19
#30 Jonathan’s Coffee-House: Before there were stock 
exchanges, there were coffee-houses: loud, unruly establish-
ments where traders and financiers congregated and where news, 
gossip, and (most importantly) share prices were swapped and 
bargained for. Jonathan’s Coffee-House was one of the first such 
establishments, and became the foundation for the first British 
stock exchange.
Ministry Cards:
#M-11 Choiseul: Étienne-François, marquis de Stainville et 
duc de Choiseul, was chief minister to Louis XV from 1758 to 
1770. For someone as important and long-tenured as Choiseul, 
we know remarkably little of him. A strong ally of Madame de 
Pompadour, Choiseul sought to re-establish French competitive-
ness in naval strength and European alliances. His policies were 
expensive, though, although the ministers Pompadour helped 
him select were able to enact reforms that helped finance these 
ambitions. He was able to survive the disaster of the Seven 
Years’ War, but ultimately fell from grace after Pompadour died.
#M-12 Dupleix: Joseph Francis Dupleix dreamt of a French 
empire in India, and spent his career trying to build it. At eighteen 
he took to the sea; by his late twenties he had become rich due 
to his skill in business and politics. He settled in India, in the 
service of the Dutch East India Company, but eventually took 
on the leadership of the French trading post at Chandernagore. 
Unfortunately, while aggressive and dynamic in military af-
fairs, he could not match the talents of Coote and Clive, and his 
schemes came to ruin. While he was scapegoated like Lally, he 
avoided the axe, dying in poverty in his native France.
#M-13 Pompadour & Du Barry: 
Jeanne Antoinette Poisson, marquise de 
Pompadour, was the chief mistress (an 
official title!) of Louis XV between the 
War of the Austrian Succession and the 
Seven Years’ War. Once granted a title 
by the King, she drove patronage and 
policy at court, backing important 
French artists and scientists. Known as 
La Reinette, Pompadour’s greatest con-
tributions, like many powers-behind-
the-throne, probably came in the area of talent-spotting. Madame 
du Barry was another important royal mistress, although she 
generally confined herself to art and society concerns rather than 
politics. Both were simultaneously vilified by gossips and ad-
mired by a wide swath of the court.
#M-14 Voltaire: François-Marie Arouet is known almost ex-
clusively by his pen name, Voltaire, and for his satire. A fierce 
critic of religion (in Candide he ridiculed Leibniz’s “best of all 
possible worlds” argument for the existence of God), he had 
mixed and complex views about the potential for a revolution in 
France—driven by contempt for both monarchy and democracy.
#M-15 Pitt the Elder: William Pitt 
(“The Great Commoner”) headed the 
British government from a variety of 
posts and appointments; this was due to 
his persistent and strong public support, 
which he earned for his fearlessness in 
criticism and adherence to his princi-
ples. His central legacy stems from his 
forceful and brilliant leadership of Great 
Britain during the Seven Years’ War; 
although he did not get along with the 
King (who never forgave Pitt’s anti-Hanover stances of the 
1750s), he was one of Britain’s greatest leaders.
#M-16 Charles Hanbury Williams: A British diplomat 
and member of Parliament known more for his political poetry 
(which attacked Walpole’s enemies with varying degrees of 
gentleness) than his speechmaking, “for which he felt he had 
no talent.” In the years running up to the Seven Years’ War he 
took posts in Berlin, Dresden, Vienna, and St. Petersburg—the 
gamut of the belligerents in the previous and forthcoming wars. 
While he had mixed success, he was at least able to keep Britain 
and Russia from open war.
#M-17 Merchant Banks: Barings Bank was founded in 
London in 1762, but lenders and insurers on a smaller, less 
integrated scale had started to sprout up years prior. Britain’s 
growing naval strength fueled trade and its appetite for credit, 
insurance, and investment.
#M-18 Samuel Johnson: “Dr. Johnson” was one of the pre-
eminent scholars and men of letters in British history, let alone 
the 18th century. Aside from his famous dictionary, one of the 
first of its kind, his essays on Shakespeare and on 200 years’ 
worth of English poetry are still considered definitive by many 
scholars.
War of the Austrian Succession:  
Tile Background
 BRITISH WAR TILES
Admiral Sir Edward Boscawen joined the British navy at the 
age of 12. He saw action in the War of Jenkins’ Ear and the 
War of the Austrian Succession, and signed Admiral Byng’s 
death warrant. “Never fire, my lads, till you see the whites of 
the Frenchman’s eyes!”
Major General Stringer Lawrence took command of the East 
India Company’s troops at the outset of the War of the Austrian 
Succession, and continued to lead in almost every important 
campaign in India. He became the first Commander-in-Chief 
for India, and worked well with his friend Robert Clive.
Admiral Sir Peter Warren served extensively in the Caribbean 
and North America, culminating in his command of the British 
ships that assaulted Louisbourg in 1745. After the War of the 
Austrian Succession he abandoned his land holdings in America 
and returned to England, where he took up politics.


--- PLAYBOOK PAGE 20 ---
Imperial Struggle ~ Playbook
20
© 2020 GMT Games, LLC
Charles Alexander, prince de Lorraine served as one of the 
principal Austrian military commanders during the War of the 
Austrian Succession. He is known for his crushing defeat by 
Frederick the Great of Prussia at Leuthen in 1757, where Fred-
erick the Great used his knowledge of the terrain to defeat the 
larger, better-equipped Austrian force in a surprise attack. He 
later served as a capable and popular governor of the Austrian 
Netherlands.
Friedrich Heinrich von Seckendorff fought for a surprising va-
riety of armies and nations during the 18th century, commanding 
troops for the Dutch, Austrian, Polish, English, Bavarian, Saxon, 
and Ansbacher armies. The only early 18th-century war he did 
not fight in was the Great Northern War. Generally successful, 
with the exception of a campaign against the Ottomans in the 
late 1730s, Seckendorff is probably one of the more underrated 
soldiers of the period of Imperial Struggle.
King George II inherited the crown of Great Britain and Ire-
land in 1727, the second of the House of Hanover to wear it. 
He displayed military courage throughout his life, especially 
when he became the last British monarch to command on the 
battlefield (at Dettingen, in 1743).
John Dalrymple, 2nd Earl of Stair fought in 
the War of the Spanish Succession, but did not 
ascend to command rank until his father’s 
creation as Earl of Stair and his own consequent 
accession to the rank of viscount. Leading the 
British forces at the very start of the war, and then standing by 
the King at Dettingen, Dalrymple distinguished himself tremen-
dously.
Chaos in Bavaria: In 1743, Seckendorff and de Broglie, the 
leaders of the allied Bavarian and French forces, quarreled. Their 
armies failed to work together; no concerted resistance was 
offered to the advance of the Austrian armies. De Broglie sur-
rendered one Bavarian stronghold after another. The Bavarians 
and French were driven back almost as far as the Rhine, where 
they were defeated in the battle of Dettingen. Consequently, the 
French were ejected entirely from Germany.
Treaty of Warsaw: Signed in 1745 during the War of the Aus-
trian Succession, this treaty created the Quadruple Alliance of 
Great Britain, Austria, the Dutch, and the Saxons, for the purpose 
of securing Maria Theresa’s claim to the Holy Roman Empire. 
Saxony, its allies in Russia, and Austria hoped to reduce Fred-
erick the Great’s Prussia to its pre-1713 borders.
Hungarian Enthusiasm: Frederick the Great captured the 
Austrian province of Silesia in 1739. In 1741, Maria Theresa of 
Austria stood before the Diet of Budapest holding her newborn 
son Joseph II, appealing in Latin to the Hungarian nobles for 
support. The Hungarians, inspired by this appeal, raised 60,000 
more light troops for the regular army. The fresh army ultimately 
retook Silesia and invaded Bavaria.
Francois de Bussy: As the War of the Austrian Succession 
gained momentum, the French made plans for a surprise attack 
on London to restore Prince Charles Stuart to the throne of Eng-
land. But Francois de Bussy, a disgruntled shipping clerk and 
illegitimate son of two courtiers, sold the details of the planned 
attack to the British for £2,000. The British acted on his informa-
tion, and hastily took naval defensive measures. These defenses, 
in combination with bad weather, led the French to abandon their 
invasion plans off the Kentish coast in March of 1744.
Robert Clive was an unassuming East India 
Company official when the Austrian Succes-
sion war broke out, but quickly distinguished 
himself with both learning and courage. He 
joined the Company’s armed forces in 1746 
and defended British holdings on several occasions. But it was 
in the Seven Years’ War that his lasting legend would take shape.
  FRENCH WAR TILES
Maurice de Saxe was considered one of the 
great generals of the eighteenth century, known 
for his adventures with women and his physi-
cal strength & vigor. He served (at different 
times) the Holy Roman Empire, the Imperial 
Army (of Austria), and the French. During the War of the Aus-
trian Succession, he commanded French forces sent to invade 
Austria in 1741, becoming famous for his surprise attack on 
Prague, in which he captured the defending garrison by stealth. 
In 1744, he commanded the men sent to invade Britain; his 
forces were wrecked by storms after proceeding a few miles out 
of harbor.  He is also known as the author of Mes Rêveries, a 
book containing his reflections on the art of war.
Lord George Murray served as a general for the Scottish 
Jacobites. During the Jacobite uprising of 1745, he angered 
Prince Charles by ordering a retreat against the Prince’s orders; 
the following day, the Prince insisted on commanding his forces 
himself. In writing his memoirs of the attack, James Johnstone 
remarked that “Had Prince Charles slept during the whole of 
the expedition, and allowed Lord George to act for him... he 
would have found the crown of Great Britain on his head, when 
he awoke.”
Colonel John O’Sullivan was educated as a priest in Paris 
and Rome. As a Catholic, he could not inherit his parents’ Irish 
lands. He emigrated to France, where he joined the army, and 
accompanied Prince Charles on his invasion of Scotland in 1745. 
There is considerable historical controversy over O’Sullivan’s 
role in the campaign, mostly focused on how much blame he 
deserves for the Culloden defeat. But he helped the Prince escape 
British clutches, and died a hero in France.
Louis Georges Érasme, duc de Contades, is known much more 
for his shattering defeat at Minden by Ferdinand of Brunswick 
than for his service in the War of the Austrian Succession, where 
his rise to high rank took place.
Nizam’s Favor: The Nizams of Hyderabad were important 
monarchs of what is now Andhra Pradesh. Both the French 
and the British sought the favor of the Nizam. In 1748, the 
Nizam died, resulting in a dispute over the throne between. 
Hyderabad came under the control of Muzaffar Jang, a French 
ally. But, by 1759, de Bussy, the French commander in charge 
of the defense of Hyderabad, had been recalled to Pondicherry 


--- PLAYBOOK PAGE 21 ---
© 2020 GMT Games, LLC
Imperial Struggle ~ Playbook
21
(and is not to be confused with the de Bussy who spied for the 
British during this period). After a surprisingly successful attack 
on Hyderabad by a small force under Robert Clive, the Nizam 
sought British support.
Frederick II, King of Prussia (“Frederick 
the Great”) is known for his military genius 
and for forging Prussia into a major European 
power. He forced Austria to cede almost all of 
Silesia by 1745. His ambitions against the 
Hapsburgs aligned him with France during the War of the Aus-
trian Succession. But as power shifted in Europe, so too did the 
camps of war, and in the Seven Years’ War France sought to 
limit its former ally’s path to prominence on the Continent.
Ulrich Frédéric Woldemar, comte de Lowendal was a Ger-
man-born French officer. He besieged and captured the Dutch 
fortress of Bergen op Zoom in 1747. The French soldiers brutally 
sacked the town, injuring or killing thousands of civilians. Many 
Europeans were outraged, and Louis XV was told of Woldemar, 
“There is no middle course, either you must hang him or make 
him a Marshal of France.” The King opted for the latter.
Field Marshal Kurt von Schwerin served first in the Dutch 
army, then entered Prussian service in 1720. In 1730, he was 
one of the members of the military tribunal that tried the Crown 
Prince of Prussia (who would later be known as Frederick the 
Great) for desertion. Frederick later promoted Schwerin and 
made him a count; in 1741 he led the Prussian Army’s victori-
ous campaign in Silesia. He later distinguished himself in other 
battles, but was shot and killed in an attack on Prague in 1757.
François de Franquetot, comte de Coigny replaced Marshal 
Villars as commander of the French army of the Rhine. He is 
best known for a victory over the Austrians at Parma during the 
War of Polish Succession in 1734, and for overseeing the French 
defenses on the Rhine during the War of the Austrian Succession.
The Mahé de la Bourdonnais was a remarkable French sea-
man responsible for colonization of the Isle of France, now 
Mauritius. On his arrival on the island in 1735, he realized that 
a small cluster of huts with a bay in the northwest would make 
an ideal location for the capital, which grew into the city of 
Port Louis. Then governor, he seemed capable of everything, 
serving as engineer, architect, agriculturalist, and superintendent 
of the hospital he had built. In 1741, he rescued the French at 
Mahé in India from a siege. He was later called to help Dupleix, 
Governor of Pondicherry, in fighting with the British, but he and 
Dupleix quarreled over the disposition of Madras, and Dupleix 
charged La Bourdonnais with treason. Voyaging back to the Isle 
of France, he was captured by the English, who brought him to 
London and set him free. Returning to France in 1748, he was 
arrested and sent to the Bastille. Although he was ultimately 
declared innocent, he died in 1753.
Bonny Prince Charlie: Prince Charles Edward Stuart was the 
son of the exiled English King James II. When Emperor Charles 
VI died in 1740, tension grew between Catholics in Scotland and 
France and Protestants in England. Charles planned an invasion 
of England, hoping to oust George II from the throne in support 
of his father. He landed in Scotland in 1745, gaining support 
from the Highlanders and winning several battles. However, 
when he and his army tried to march to London, they were forced 
to retreat to Scotland. Defeated at Culloden Moor, Charles fled 
through England, reportedly disguising himself as shipwrecked 
merchant and a noble lady. He eventually reached the safety of 
France. In 1748, when England made peace with France, Charles 
was exiled from France. His supporters faded away and he was 
excluded from his father’s will. He died in 1788.
Seven Years War: Tile Background
 BRITISH WAR TILES
John Bradstreet commanded the British attack on Fort Fron-
tenac, a key French stronghold on Lake Ontario.
Sir William Johnson was the chief British diplomat for Iroquois 
affairs, and led Native warriors on several occasions. He also 
took Fort Niagara and accompanied Amherst to Montreal. After 
the war he continued to build positive relations between the 
Iroquois, the British, and the tribes who had taken France’s side.
Admiral Sir Edward Hawke commanded the British fleet that 
defeated the French at Quiberon Bay, ending French ambitions 
of naval superiority or even parity with Britain. His aggressive 
move to engage Conflans’ fleet in the bay took the French com-
mander by surprise, and ended the threat of French invasion.
Robert Clive (“Clive of India”) was one of 
the greatest generals and statesmen of the mid-
century period. He held Arcot against the 
Carnatic nawab Chandar Ali in 1751; Ali’s 
close alliance with Dupleix and the French put 
this victory among the first in what would become the Seven 
Years’ War. He is best known for his victory at Plassey in 1757, 
which cemented British control of the Bengal region, and for 
his fearless governance thereafter.
Robert Monckton was one of the steadiest officers in the North 
American campaigns, executing campaigns in Nova Scotia and 
then on the mainland. He fought at the Plains of Abraham, and 
after the war for Canada ended, Amherst charged him with the 
capture of Martinique (which he reliably captured). The French 
ended up ceding control of New France at the treaty table in 
exchange for Martinique, so in a sense, Monckton won Canada 
for Britain.
Jeffery Amherst fought briefly in Europe under the command of 
the Duke of Cumberland, then took command in North America 
from Abercrombie in 1758 and relentlessly chipped away at the 
French position until he took Montreal in 1760. He is also known 
for intentionally spreading smallpox to the Native American 
population, who he denigrated as an “execrable race.”
John Manners, Marquess of Granby fought alongside Ferdi-
nand of Brunswick, Britain’s key ally on the Continent, for most 
of the Seven Years’ War in Europe. He distinguished himself 
in several key battles (albeit not at Minden, where Sackville 
refused to authorize Granby’s cavalry to pursue the French) and 


--- PLAYBOOK PAGE 22 ---
Imperial Struggle ~ Playbook
22
© 2020 GMT Games, LLC
parlayed his enormous popularity into a somewhat successful 
political career. 
James Wolfe is best known for his victory over the marquis 
de Montcalm at the Plains of Abraham in 1759, in which both 
generals perished. Nonetheless, this would prove the penultimate 
blow that Britain would strike to win the war for Canada. 
Sir Eyre Coote served with the British East India Company, par-
ticularly in India where he fought Mughal princes, French proxy 
allies, and the French themselves for thirty years (taking part 
in both the Seven Years’ War, particularly in the pivotal Battle 
of Wandiwash, and in the American War of Independence). He 
despised Clive, which led to poor communication, but it’s hard 
to argue with the results of their combined brilliance. 
Morta la Bestia: Frederick the Great is alleged to have said 
these words (“The beast is dead”) when he heard of the death 
of Empress Elizabeth of Russia and the accession of her son 
Peter who, as an admirer of Frederick, had no desire to continue 
the war.
Damned Audacity: The British efforts at Quiberon and, a few 
days earlier, Lagos (Portugal) culminated in Admiral Hawke’s 
aggressive decision to pursue Conflans into the treacherous 
shoals of Quiberon Bay. He might have been motivated by 
frustration at several near misses in his earlier attempts to bring 
the French to battle, or simply by an assessment that the key 
moment was at hand. Similarly, Admiral Sir Edward Boscawen 
maintained perfect focus on his open blockade, anticipating the 
destination of French Admiral Auguste de la Clue’s fleet as it 
escaped the first blockade point and refusing to be distracted by 
the pivot of de la Clue’s rear-guard. This allowed Boscawen to 
force battle near Lagos and cripple the French squadron.
Old Fritz was a nickname for Frederick II, the 
military genius who succeeded to the Prussian 
throne in 1740. He built Prussia into a Euro-
pean power to be reckoned with on both the 
battlefield and in scholarship, and added to 
Prussia’s territory in both the War of the Austrian Succession 
and the Seven Years’ War. He is of course better known by the 
honorific “Frederick the Great.”
  FRENCH WAR TILES
Thomas Arthur, comte de Lally, served as an advisor to 
Bonny Prince Charlie during the Jacobite Uprising of 1745. 
After Charles’ defeat at Culloden, Lally went to India, and 
made great progress against East India Company forces before 
losing the Battle of Wandiwash, and with it most of the French 
territories in south India, to Sir Eyre Coote. Along with Dupleix 
he was scapegoated at court for the French setbacks in India, 
and beheaded.
Victor François, duc de Broglie, served as a subordinate com-
mander to most of the French marshals of the Seven Years’ War. 
He was reliable and competent, and eventually took command 
in his own right after the defeat at Minden. He had a deep but 
respectful rivalry with Granby, whom he admired.
Sieur Louis Coulon de Villiers is notable for forcing the sur-
render of Fort Necessity in 1754, from George Washington, then 
the fort’s commander.
François de Chevert was a consistently successful corps com-
mander in the first three wars of Imperial Struggle. His bravery 
and initiative led him to distinguish himself at Hastenbeck 
against the Duke of Cumberland, and at Lutterberg against 
another Hanoverian commander (von Oberg). He led some of 
France’s most prestigious units into battle, including the Volo-
ntaires Royaux and the Chasseurs de Fischer.
Coureurs des bois: “Runners of the woods”, these French 
hunters and traders were masters of the Canadian and North 
American wilds second only to the Native populations they 
interacted with. They served as scouts and guides for the French 
war effort in North America; their expertise and familiarity with 
the land often provided an important edge in battle.
Louis-Antoine, comte de Bougainville, displayed an amazing 
variety of talents during his lengthy career—he left his mark 
on the century as navigator, ship captain, army officer, and 
diplomat. In the French and Indian War he took part in most 
of the successful French actions before the setbacks of 1759, 
and despite great effort could not successfully defend Quebec 
from the British after his commanding officer, the marquis de 
Montcalm, fell in battle. After the war he became the first French 
captain to circumnavigate the globe (Bougainville Island in the 
Solomons is named for him); he then had another chance at the 
British during the American Revolution, wherein he and his ship 
were part of the French fleet that blocked Cornwallis’ hopes of 
escape from Yorktown.
Louis-Joseph de Montcalm-Grozon, marquis 
de Montcalm de Saint-Veran, was one of the 
most capable French commanders of the 
Seven Years’ War. Early in the conflict he cap-
tured Oswego and Fort William Henry from 
the British; these allowed the French to deny crucial axes of 
advance against New France to the enemy. As well, he de-
fended Ticonderoga against a much larger British army, although 
his aggressive approach led him to danger and death at the Plains 
of Abraham in Quebec.
Daniel Liénard de Beaujeu was a brave and capable officer 
noted for his adoption of Native war customs, and for his leader-
ship of Native allies in the early years of the French and Indian 
War. He died early in the engagement at the Monongahela. 
Charles Eugène Gabriel de la Croix de Cas-
tries, marquis et maréchal de Castries, 
earned national acclaim due to his valor in the 
War of the Austrian Succession. In the Seven 
Years’ War, he fought courageously through 
wounds in several French defeats, including Rossbach and 
Minden, before triumphing over Brunswick at Clostercamp. 
This set the stage for a lengthy and successful career in the 
French government; when the Bastille fell, Castries was quick 
to join the Royalist cause.


--- PLAYBOOK PAGE 23 ---
© 2020 GMT Games, LLC
Imperial Struggle ~ Playbook
23
Monongahela Ambush: Braddock’s expedition against Fort 
Duquesne culminated in this disaster, where French and Native 
troops ambushed and broke the morale of Braddock’s redcoats. 
The rough terrain neutralized Braddock’s artillery, and the na-
tive warriors’ matchless knowledge of the area threw the British 
into chaos.
Hadik’s Raid: In response to the Prussian defeat at Kolin, Count 
Andras Hadik led a detachment of about 5,000 cavalry troops 
along the unexpectedly clear path to Berlin and captured the 
city. Taking the garrison completely by surprise (and fooling 
it into thinking it was outnumbered, when the opposite was 
true), Hadik’s men compelled a surrender and extracted a huge 
ransom payment before departing in a hurry ahead of Prussian 
reinforcements.
Nawabs Rally: The French military effort in India was con-
sistently undermined by their Indian allies’ treachery and 
unreliability. The British simply had the better of the covert 
arrangements and understandings that determined so much in 
India; additionally, native allies would often withdraw at the 
first sign of difficulty in battle. But it’s plausible that the French 
alliances could have been more stable; this might have provided 
a decisive edge in determining which of the two realms would 
dominate India.
Revolution Era: Event and Ministry Cards
Event Cards:
#31 Nootka Incident: In 1789, tensions between British and 
Spanish traders came to a head at Nootka Sound (near Vancouver 
Island). Spain had claimed the entirety of the Pacific coastline, 
but British traders would be denied no longer, and although war 
was averted, Spain was forced to back down from its exclusive 
control of those sea lanes. This additional access to the Pacific 
sea trade would prove very profitable indeed.
#32 Haitian Revolution: The St. 
Domingue slave revolt of 1791, led by 
Toussaint L’Ouverture, was the most 
successful slave uprising in history; it 
resulted in the new sovereign state of 
Haiti, abolishing slavery and creating a 
republic (albeit one with L’Ouverture 
as permanent head of state, and estab-
lishing Catholicism as the only permit-
ted religion). L’Ouverture masterfully 
played the French and Spanish against 
one another until he and his movement were ready for a sustained 
military effort.
DESIGN NOTE: The Haitian Revolution took place in 1791, 
technically outside the time covered by Imperial Struggle, but 
potentially could have occurred earlier as L’Ouverture had 
been a free man for at least several years prior to the revolt. 
It’s also such an important event in the history of the Carib-
bean that it seemed a shame not to put it on an Event card.
#33 Loge Des Neuf Soeurs: One of several pro-American 
Masonic lodges in France, the Nine Sisters organized support 
for the Revolution both financially and intellectually. The mo-
mentum generated for these idealistic gatherings only gained 
strength with the Revolution’s success, and carried forward into 
the French Revolution as well.
#34 La Gabelle: The French salt tax was one of the most oner-
ous of the dozens of taxes that peasants and lower-class workers 
had to suffer for the ancien regime. Remarkably persistent, and 
representative of the virtually unreformable French tax system 
of the 18th century, it was repealed almost immediately by the 
revolutionary government in 1790. It would return again with 
Napoleon, and remain in force through World War II.
#35 Jesuit Abolition: In 1760, the sugar industry on Mar-
tinique collapsed. A financial crisis for France, this one was 
remarkable in that the colony was largely owned and managed 
by the Jesuit Order. The disaster provided a long-awaited open-
ing for the Order’s political and religious rivals (in particular 
Madame de Pompadour, who hated the Jesuits for their refusal 
to endorse her relationship with the King). They mounted a 
coordinated legal assault on the Jesuits; this spread widely 
across Catholic monarchies and even earned the endorsement 
of the Pope.
#36 Wealth of Nations: To an economist, there’s a serious 
argument that the most important event of 1776 was the publi-
cation of An Inquiry Into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth 
of Nations, by the Scottish natural philosopher Adam Smith. 
(What revolution?) A systematic and powerful analysis of the 
true nature of national wealth, the importance of specialization, 
and the unintended consequences of humans’ self-interested 
behavior (represented in Smith’s memorable metaphor “the 
invisible hand”), this book remains thoroughly relevant today. 
#37 Debt Crisis: By the time of the 
Revolution Era in Imperial Struggle 
both powers had spent enormous sums 
on warfare, naval construction, and a 
host of other investments; some of 
which bore fruit (like the British East 
India Company) and some of which did 
not. Regardless, debt crises and the 
threats of inflation and default caused 
panics and uncertainty throughout the 
period—particularly in France, which 
historically was less able than Britain to clear away centuries 
of antiquated financial and taxation methods.
#38 East Asia Piracy: While privateers and piracy had largely 
been brought low in the Caribbean by this time, it still flour-
ished on the African coast and in East Asia, particularly near 
the Malacca straits and around the Southeast Asian kingdoms. 
This added to the risk of commerce past India, although Eu-
ropean powers were gradually tightening their grip even over 
such distant waters.


--- PLAYBOOK PAGE 24 ---
Imperial Struggle ~ Playbook
24
© 2020 GMT Games, LLC
#39 Stamp Act: This British tariff on 
paper goods and documents, passed in 
1765, was a major spark for the Ameri-
can Revolution. It only lasted a few 
months before Parliament repealed it, 
but the damage was done.
#40 Falklands Crisis: Both Britain and Spain claimed the 
Falklands Islands (“Islas Malvinas”) off the southern tip of South 
America. In 1770 Spanish forces seized Port Egmont from the 
British, sparking an international crisis. Choiseul, spoiling for 
a fight after the defeats of the Seven Years’ War, sought to back 
Spain’s claim and escalate to full-blown war over the islands, but 
Louis XV demurred. This was also the final blow to Choiseul, 
who left his post in the crisis. 
#41 Cook And Bougainville: The two greatest explorers of 
the century for Britain and France respectively were James Cook 
and Louis-Antoine, comte de Bougainville; Cook’s voyages to 
Australia and Hawaii, until then unknown to Europe, as well as 
northwestern Canada and Alaska, form an awe-inspiring record 
of navigational and leadership feats. Bougainville’s circumnavi-
gation of the globe was the first by a French captain, and the 
detailed records he kept of his visit to Tahiti inspired an entire 
wave of cultural anthropology. The Pacific island named for him 
was the focus of fierce fighting during World War II. 
Ministry Cards:
#M-19 James Watt: Watt did not invent the steam engine, but 
he introduced crucial improvements to steam engine design. 
With these improvements, which vastly increased the engine’s 
efficiency and versatility, the Industrial Revolution began in 
Britain.
#M-20 Papacy-Hanover Negotiations: When the Papacy 
refrained from recognizing Charles Stuart as his father James’ 
successor to the English throne, this was as good as outright 
legitimation of Hanoverian (and thus Protestant) rule in England. 
This dealt a death blow to the Jacobites, who previously could 
always count on the Holy See’s support.
#M-21 Townshend Acts: The series 
of revenue-related acts of Parliament 
called the Townshend Acts (for Charles 
Townsend, then the Chancellor of the 
Exchequer) were passed following the 
Declaratory Act of 1766, which as-
serted Parliament’s right to legislate and 
govern in all matters related to the 
American colonies. Needless to say, this 
did not go over well, particularly in New 
York which was specifically targeted. 
Although the Townshend Acts were repealed fairly quickly, the 
damage was done, and the ensuing Tea Act spurred the Boston 
Tea Party.
#M-22 Edmund Burke: One of Britain’s preeminent scholar-
statesmen, Burke wrote a searing critique of the French Revolu-
tion entitled Reflections on the Revolution in France, in which 
he decried the revolution’s unintended consequences and its 
destruction of social capital and culture. For the traditionalist 
ideas he articulated he is sometimes described as the first modern 
conservative. He endorsed the American Revolution, though, 
and believed it was counterproductive to use military force to 
keep the colonies in line.
#M-23 Turgot: Jacques Turgot, an economist and inheritor 
of the Physiocrats (one of the defining movements in early 
economics) served as finance minister to Louis XVI. His ini-
tiatives to tax and debt simplification massively improved the 
royal financial situation, but his curtailment of sinecures and 
privileges alienated important courtiers (including the Queen). 
He believed France could not afford intervention on behalf of 
the American colonists, despite his deep sympathy with their 
cause (although he also felt that France should not support a 
country that would perpetuate slavery).
#M-24 North American Trade: French trade in the natural 
resources of North America generated not just substantial funds 
for the crown, but also great cachet, given the uniqueness of 
North American furs.
#M-25 Marquis de Condorcet: A 
mathematician and early game theorist, 
Condorcet also wrote extensively about 
politics (including an endorsement of 
women’s equality and racial equality). 
He is best known for the Condorcet 
method of determining an electorate’s 
preference among many candidates, 
which involves a sequence of pairwise 
matchups that eliminates half the can-
didates every round. (There is scholar-
ship indicating that Condorcet’s method best aggregates a large 
group’s preferences.)
#M-26 Lavoisier: Antoine Laurent de Lavoisier was perhaps 
France’s—and Europe’s—greatest chemist, forging progress in 
a wide variety of chemical and biological disciplines. He dis-
covered that matter does not change mass as a result of chemical 
processes like combustion, isolated and described the properties 
of elements like oxygen and hydrogen, and systematized chem-
istry to an unprecedented degree. His role in the antiquated and 
arbitrary French tax system sealed his fate during the Revolution, 
though, and he went to the guillotine in 1794.  


--- PLAYBOOK PAGE 25 ---
© 2020 GMT Games, LLC
Imperial Struggle ~ Playbook
25
American War of Independence:  
Tile Background
 BRITISH WAR TILES
Charles Cornwallis, Earl of Cornwallis led British troops in 
several major campaigns of the American War of Independence, 
including the siege of Charleston; the campaign for New York; 
and in the Carolinas where he fought a notable battle at Guil-
ford Court House. Of course, he is best known for his surrender 
under siege at Yorktown in 1781, which cemented American 
independence.
William Howe, a veteran of both of Britain’s previous global 
conflicts, commanded all British forces in North America during 
the American War of Independence until his resignation in 1777 
(following the debacle at Saratoga). His capture of New York 
was well executed, but his reticence to force extensive combat 
allowed Washington and the Continental army to slip away.
Sir Eyre Coote gets a second entry here due 
to his incredible battlefield presence and com-
mand in Britain’s first major counteroffensive 
of the Second Anglo-Mysore War. At Porto 
Novo, Coote’s mixed Company, regular, and 
sepoy forces met a massive Indian force led by Hyder Ali, and 
defeated them. He followed this up with a decisive victory over 
Hyder Ali and his son, Tipu Sultan (who would later face Corn-
wallis in the Third Anglo-Mysore War).
Brant’s Volunteers: A mixed force of Mohawk and Tory militia 
led by Joseph Brant (né Thayendanegea), the Volunteers raided, 
looted, and harassed Patriot settlements. Brant, a Mohawk by 
birth, played an important role in improving relations between 
the British and the Iroquois tribes.
Sir Guy Carleton commanded British forces in Quebec, defend-
ing it from Continental attack in 1775. Although Montreal fell 
in late 1775, Carleton held out in Quebec City, with the aid of 
some of the first Hessian troops to fight for the British crown. He 
took overall command of British forces from Sir Henry Clinton 
at the end of the Revolution.
Cornplanter, a chief of the Seneca (themselves a member tribe 
of the Iroquois Confederacy), urged his people to remain distant 
from the “white man’s war.” But when the confederation decided 
to side with the British, Cornplanter led Seneca warriors in fierce 
and brutal frontier fighting. After the war Cornplanter acted as a 
liaison between the new American government and the Seneca, 
trying to maintain Native territorial integrity. He met with some 
success but ultimately became disillusioned.
John Stuart was the architect of British alliance with the 
Cherokee and other Native tribes of the southern colonies. At 
his urging the Cherokee unleashed a swarm of raids and attacks 
on Patriot centers of support; they also fought alongside the 
British at Twelve Mile Creek in 1775.
Admiral George Brydges Rodney com-
manded several important fleet actions in the 
Seven Years’ War and the American Revolu-
tion. He was an effective and dynamic naval 
commander, and made the greatest impact in 
raids and prize captures, as well as providing crucial relief to 
besieged Gibraltar. He helped prosecute the Anglo-Dutch war 
that erupted during the Revolution, acquiring a reputation as a 
glory and fortune hunter.
Major John André was Howe’s chief of intelligence. A dash-
ing and intelligent young officer, André took charge of Brit-
ish espionage efforts in the Revolution. He coordinated the 
nearly-successful betrayal of West Point to the British, and 
the subsequent defection of Benedict Arnold. Caught by an 
American patrol and identified as a spy, he was hanged at George 
Washington’s order.
Benedict Arnold is perhaps America’s most notorious traitor 
(even more so than, ahem, Aldrich Ames). A capable sailor 
as well as soldier, Arnold’s maneuvers at Saratoga are widely 
credited as decisive in that victory, and his invasion of Quebec, 
while prematurely called off, posed a terrible threat to British 
control of Canada. Ill-tempered, short of money, suffering from 
the pain of battle wounds, and resentful over what he saw as a 
lack of credit for his contributions to the war, Arnold persuaded 
himself that the Patriots could not ultimately win, and plotted 
to surrender the West Point fortress to the British. The capture 
of John André, his British handler, exposed Arnold’s treason, 
although Washington’s disbelief at this turn of events allowed 
Arnold enough time to flee to England.
Anglo-Dutch Conflict: The Fourth Anglo-Dutch War stemmed 
from Dutch opportunism over Britain’s distraction throughout 
the world at the time of the American Revolution. The two na-
tions hadn’t fought for naval dominance since before William 
of Orange took the English throne, and this one ended very 
badly for the Dutch (although they were able to recoup a few 
of their territorial losses at the Paris treaty table). Nonetheless, 
it did create additional strain on Britain’s naval priorities and 
resources at a crucial time.
Hessians: King George’s status as the Elector of Hanover won 
the service of a great many—at least 50,000—German troops, 
who hailed from a wide variety of German principalities and 
electorates. Most of them came from Hanover, Hesse-Cassel, and 
Hesse-Hanau, which caused them just to be called “Hessians”.


--- PLAYBOOK PAGE 26 ---
Imperial Struggle ~ Playbook
26
© 2020 GMT Games, LLC
  FRENCH WAR TILES
Jean-Baptiste Donatien de Vimeur, comte de Rochambeau, 
held overall command of the French army that came to reinforce 
the American colonists, once France committed to intervention 
and to war with Britain. He arrived in the colonies in 1780 and, 
once he felt strategically secure, marched to meet Washington’s 
army in New York. The Yorktown campaign, and British defeat, 
soon followed.
Admiral François Joseph Paul de Grasse, comte de Grasse, 
helmed the French fleet that defeated the British at the mouth 
of the Chesapeake Bay in Maryland, denying Cornwallis’ army 
supply and evacuation, and reinforcing the French and Ameri-
cans with victuals and shot. Cornwallis was left with no choice 
but to surrender his army.
George Washington (“the American Cincin-
natus”) led the Continental Army as command-
er-in-chief and, after the Patriot victory in the 
American Revolution, served as the new re-
public’s first President under its recently-rati-
fied Constitution. Unquestionably one of America’s greatest 
statesmen and war leaders, Washington’s legacy and legend 
remain among the most powerful historical influences on 
American culture.
Marie-Joseph Paul Yves Roch Gilbert du 
Motier, marquis de Lafayette, aside from 
having one of the 18th century’s best names, 
was a devoted admirer of Washington and the 
ideas of the Revolution generally. Highly liter-
ate, charming, and talented as a military officer, Lafayette arrived 
in the colonies well before France officially intervened, and 
served with distinction and character from Brandywine in 1777 
through the wintering at Valley Forge, the battle of Monmouth, 
and Yorktown. One of only eight individuals to receive honor-
ary U.S. citizenship, Lafayette was also a passionate abolition-
ist, and he played a substantial role in the early stages of the 
French Revolution before it went so tragically awry.
Admiral Pierre André de Suffren St. Tropez, like many of-
ficers of the global Anglo-French conflict that subsumed the 
American Revolution, saw action in the previous two wars as 
well. It was in that latter conflict, though, that de Suffren earned 
his reputation as a top-notch naval strategist and even theorist—
engaging in a lengthy chess match against the British squadron 
supporting the East India Company. He and de Bussy-Castelnau 
engaged in a close strategic partnership, with de Suffren at sea 
and de Bussy on land, and also supported Hyder Ali’s campaigns 
against the British. 
Morgan’s Rifles was an elite unit of rifle-toting Patriot light 
infantry, renowned for the marksmanship of its men and for 
its extensive service record during the Revolution. It fought in 
both the northern and southern theaters, under both Washington 
and Greene.
Charles Joseph Patissier, Marquis de Bussy-Castelnau, was 
a protégé of Dupleix and a capable soldier. Charged with seiz-
ing British territory and assets in India during the American 
Revolution, and coordinating with Hyder Ali and Tipu Sultan 
of Mysore, the French captured Mahé, an important port on the 
west coast of India. With their supply lines restored, the French 
had a genuine chance at regaining substantial holdings in India, 
but ultimately fell short as the East India Company committed 
strongly to the defense of India.
Friedrich Wilhelm August Heinrich Ferdinand, Baron von 
Steuben, was a career officer of the Prussian Army who came 
to America to train the Continental Army in modern fighting 
methods, tactics, and organization. His “Blue Book” (Regula-
tions for the Order and Discipline of the Troops of the United 
States) codified American army training doctrine for a genera-
tion. He commanded a division at Yorktown and became a U.S. 
citizen after the war.
Nathanael Greene (“the Fighting Quaker”) led a relentless 
campaign to recapture the southern American colonies from the 
British. He was present at many key engagements, including 
Brandywine, Guilford Court House, Germantown, Trenton, 
and Eutaw Springs. Widely praised for his patience, judgment, 
and leadership, Greene did as much as any American officer to 
secure Patriot victory.
East River Wind: Washington’s escape from New York under 
cover of a fortuitous fog—which might have been expected to 
blow away under the typical winds that blew along New York’s 
east harbor—saved the fledgling Continental Army from utter 
destruction at the hands of General Howe’s much larger and 
better-supported British invasion force.
Bunker Hill: The month after Lexington and Concord, Ameri-
can colonists built fortifications on Breed’s Hill (near the actual 
Bunker Hill) outside Boston, prompting a British assault. Al-
though the British were able to occupy the fortifications, they 
took significant losses in so doing. This was the first hint that 
the war might be protracted and bloody.


--- PLAYBOOK PAGE 27 ---
© 2020 GMT Games, LLC
Imperial Struggle ~ Playbook
27
S
ince GMT Games published our Twilight Struggle back 
in 2005, Jason and I have wanted to create another game 
together. It’s no coincidence that this one is also about a 
superpower conflict on a global scale. But unlike Twilight Strug-
gle, where the identities of the superpowers are well known, in 
Imperial Struggle the two rivals are trying to determine which 
one will dominate the nascent modern age. This is not a trivial 
difference. Imperial Struggle covers twice as much history, 
features multiple shooting wars with the two-player nations in 
direct conflict, and demands a more nuanced treatment of the 
period’s other great powers. It didn’t take us long to realize that 
Imperial Struggle could borrow very little from Twilight Struggle 
if we had any hope of doing justice to this period and situation.
The biggest design challenge in Imperial Struggle was sim-
ply: how do we make a simple, quick-playing game that covers 
92 years of history and four major wars , and embraces not just 
military and political but social and cultural competition, without 
requiring the player to learn the rules to both a Eurogame and 
a wargame? Imperial Struggle unites all of these dynamics by 
keeping decision-making at a high level. The players represent 
monarchs and governments, whose direct control over mili-
tary affairs was constrained by poor information and layers of 
delegation. So, a system where the players could make com-
mitments and recognize weaknesses, but with limited ability to 
optimize, made sense. Dramatic territorial changes can happen 
due to warfare in Imperial Struggle, but generally, wars ought 
to feel constrained, where the loser feels that the concessions 
represented by Treaty Points can enable recovery and revenge 
in the next conflict.
Instead, the key decisions rotate around where and when 
to project power and seize opportunity. Each Action Round 
invites you to create the best possible meld of Investment tile 
and Event in hand, with an eye to denying options your oppo-
nent. In Twilight Struggle the tension comes from managing the 
adverse events in one’s hand each turn, minimizing their impact 
while making progress on the board. Here, conversely, the ten-
sion comes from executing the best possible combinations and 
power moves, and blocking or playing around your opponent’s.
Players sometimes ask us about the representation of alter-
nate history in Twilight Struggle. There are so many fascinating 
Cold War events that actually happened, but surely there should 
be room for more what-if in the event deck. We didn’t go in that 
direction in Twilight Struggle, except for the Turn Zero expan-
sion, but in Imperial Struggle the Event cards resemble the ones 
found in COIN games. Our decision to sever the action points 
from the events in Imperial Struggle—both to limit the impact 
of widely imbalanced card draws and to enable a pro-French 
and pro-British version of most events—is something we hope 
players particularly enjoy.
And we also hope that our shared Anglophilia and Franco-
philia pervade the game. Imperial Struggle has been a long time 
coming, and one of the constant motivators to finish and deliver 
the game has been our appreciation and affection for these two 
great nations. It was critical for both of us that France and Britain 
should be co-stars of Imperial Struggle, with the greatness of 
each on full display. One important turning point in the develop-
ment of Imperial Struggle was the creation of the Ministry cards, 
with their side-specific mechanics. Playtest feedback indicated 
that it felt too similar to play Britain and France—an outcome 
we decidedly did not want! The Ministry cards were our solu-
tion. Along with the Event card designs, we hoped they would 
create a balanced competitive experience that also reflects the 
two antagonists’ different worldviews, priorities, and ambitions.
Although all historical eras have their fascinating personali-
ties, we felt that this era featured some of the most remarkable 
and distinctive people of all time. The Ministry and Event cards 
helped us give them their due in gameplay, and putting them 
(particularly the military figures) on the War tiles added the 
sweep and march of history to the Wars. Earlier versions of the 
game granted special powers to certain leaders, and added more 
asymmetry in the ways wars could go, but ultimately those felt 
clunky to play with. If players embrace Imperial Struggle, and 
the version you hold now becomes familiar, we look forward 
to resurrecting some ideas that felt like a bridge too far in a 
game that already asks players to master some novel systems 
and gameplay.
Some playtesters and observers have asked: where is Napo-
leon? Simply put: early versions of the game that included the 
Napoleonic period increased game time by almost a third, and 
added more rules complexity that really only came into play in 
the endgame. If players get a lot of value from Imperial Struggle, 
the temptation for us to create an expansion or follow-on game 
to handle the Revolution and Napoleon (or whoever the Revolu-
tion’s successor might be!) will be irresistible.
But enough about what isn’t in the box. We hope you find 
hours of tension, triumph, and glory in its cardboard contents; 
that if you are less familiar with the turbulence and drama that 
characterized the 18th century, you’ll fall under its spell as we 
did; and if you are already a devotee of the period, that you feel 
we’ve done it justice.
Designer’s Notes


--- PLAYBOOK PAGE 28 ---
Imperial Struggle ~ Playbook
28
© 2020 GMT Games, LLC
© 2020 GMT Games LLC
P.O. Box 1308, Hanford, CA 93232 
www.GMTGames.com
Selected Bibliography & Ludography
John B. Owen, The Eighteenth Century, Rowman and Littlefield 
1975.
Derek McKay & H.M. Scott, The Rise of the Great Powers 
1648-1815, Routledge 2014.
Robert and Isabelle Tombs, That Sweet Enemy: The British and 
French from the Sun King to the Present, Knopf 2007.
Robert Markham, Soldier Kings: The Seven Years War World-
wide, Avalanche Press 2002.
Zara Anishanslin, Portrait of a Woman in Silk: Hidden Histories 
of the British Atlantic World, Yale 2016.
Stephen Yafa, Cotton: The Biography of a Revolutionary Fiber, 
Penguin 2005.
Paul Lacroix, France in the Eighteenth Century: Its Institutions, 
Customs, and Costumes, Bickers & Son 1876 (original); ed. 
Suzanne Alleyn, Spyderwort Press, 2017.
Douglas Peers, India under Colonial Rule 1700-1885, Rout-
ledge 2013.
Emile de Bonnechose, The History of France from The Invasion 
of the Franks under Clovis to the Accession of Louis Philippe, 
Routledge 1856 (tr. William Robson).
Linda Frey and Marsha Frey, The Treaties of the War of the 
Spanish Succession: An Historical and Critical Dictionary, 
Greenwood 1995.
Julian Stafford Corbett, England in the Seven Years War: A 
Study in Combined Strategy (vol. II), 1907; ref. Pickle Partners 
Publishing 2011.
Credits
Game Design: Ananda Gupta & Jason Matthews
Developer: Ralan Hill
Art Director: Rodger B. MacGowan
Cover Art (game box, rules): Terry Leeds
Map, Counters, and Cards: Terry Leeds
Manuals and Player Aids: Charlie Kibler
Editing: James McFetridge, Kai Jensen, Jeff Loewenguth, 
Margo Marquess, Andrew Polak
Production Coordination: Tony Curtis
Executive Producers: Tony Curtis, Rodger MacGowan, Andy 
Lewis, Gene Billingsley & Mark Simonitch
Playtesters: Peter Card, Riku Riekkinen, Daniel Haas, Chris 
Cantrell, Rajan Gupta, Harold Buchanan, Pat Mulvihill, Trevor 
Bender, Charlie Roselius, Tim Porter, Barry Setser, Michael 
Lahl, Nicholas Werner, Nicolas Emmanuel Chaffron, Marco 
Poutré, Tom Kassel, Marc Guenette, David Stengle, Luis Soto, 
John Echeverria, Michael Solomon, David Amidon, Andrew 
Kluck, David Abecassis, Nicolas Gillon, Pierre Faucher, Hervé 
Godinot, Steve Cole, Ryan O’Donoghue, Joel Toppen
VASSAL module: Joel Toppen
Much Love & Special Thanks: Solveig Singleton
Decorative Page Art and Divider: FreePic (www.freepik.com)

